# Page 2

2
systematic error in the acceleration residuals was a con-
stant bias, aP , directed toward the Sun. Such anoma-
lous data have been continuously received ever since. Jet
Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) and The Aerospace Corpo-
ration produced independent orbit determination analy-
ses of the Pioneer data extending up to July 1998. We
ultimately concluded [12, 13], that there is an unmodeled
acceleration, aP , towards the Sun of ∼ 8 × 10− 8 cm/s2
for both Pioneer 10 and Pioneer 11.
The purpose of this paper is to present a detailed expla-
nation of the analysis of the apparent anomalous, weak,
long-range acceleration of the Pioneer spacecraft that we
detected in the outer regions of the solar system. We at-
tempt to survey all sensible forces and to estimate their
contributions to the anomalous acceleration. We will dis-
cuss the eﬀects of these small non-gravitational forces
(both generated on-board and external to the vehicle) on
the motion of the distant spacecraft together with the
methods used to collect and process the radio Doppler
navigational data.
We begin with descriptions of the spacecraft and other
systems and the strategies for obtaining and analyzing
information from them. In Section II we describe the
Pioneer (and other) spacecraft. We provide the reader
with important technical information on the spacecraft,
much of which is not easily accessible. In Section III we
describe how raw data is obtained and analyzed and in
Section IV we discuss the basic elements of a theoretical
foundation for spacecraft navigation in the solar system.
The next major part of this manuscript is a description
and analysis of the results of this investigation. We ﬁrst
describe how the anomalous acceleration was originally
identiﬁed from the data of all the spacecraft in Section
V [12, 13]. We then give our recent results in Section
VI. In the following three sections we discuss possible
experimental systematic origins for the signal. These in-
clude systematics generated by physical phenomena from
sources external to (Section VII) and internal to (Sec-
tion VIII) the spacecraft. This is followed by Section IX,
where the accuracy of the solution for aP is discussed. In
the process we go over possible numerical/calculational
errors/systematics. Sections VII-IX are then summarized
in the total error budget of Section X.
We end our presentation by ﬁrst considering possible
unexpected physical origins for the anomaly (Section XI).
In our conclusion, Section XII, we summarize our results
and suggest venues for further study of the discovered
anomaly.
II. THE PIONEER AND OTHER SP ACECRAFT
In this section we describe in some detail the Pioneer
10 and 11 spacecraft and their missions. We concentrate
on those spacecraft systems that play important roles in
maintaining the continued function of the vehicles and
in determining their dynamical behavior in the solar sys-
tem. Speciﬁcally we present an overview of propulsion
and attitude control systems, as well as thermal and com-
munication systems.
Since our analysis addresses certain results from the
Galileo and Ulysses missions, we also give short descrip-
tions of these missions in the ﬁnal subsection.
A. General description of the Pioneer spacecraft
Although some of the more precise details are often
diﬃcult to uncover, the general parameters of the Pi-
oneer spacecraft are known and well documented [1]-[6].
The two spacecraft are identical in design [14]. At launch
each had a “weight” (mass) of 259 kg. The “dry weight”
of the total module was 223 kg as there were 36 kg of
hydrazine propellant [15, 16]. The spacecraft were de-
signed to ﬁt within the three meter diameter shroud of
an added third stage to the Atlas/Centaur launch vehi-
cle. Each spacecraft is 2.9 m long from its base to its
cone-shaped medium-gain antenna. The high gain an-
tenna (HGA) is made of aluminum honeycomb sandwich
material. It is 2.74 m in diameter and 46 cm deep in the
shape of a parabolic dish. (See Figures 1 and 2.)
FIG. 1: NASA photo #72HC94, with caption “The Pioneer
F spacecraft during a checkout with the launch vehicle third
stage at Cape Kennedy.” Pioneer F became Pioneer 10.
The main equipment compartment is 36 cm deep.
The hexagonal ﬂat top and bottom have 71 cm long
sides. The equipment compartment provides a thermally
controlled environment for scientiﬁc instruments. Two
three-rod trusses, 120 degrees apart, project from two
sides of the equipment compartment. At their ends, each
holds two SNAP-19 (Space Nuclear Auxiliary Power,
