# Page 12

12
After a maneuver in mid-1993, there was not enough
power left to support the IPP. But analysts still could get
a rough determination approximately every six months
using information obtained from the conscan maneuvers.
No spin determinations were made after 1995. However,
the archived conscan data could still yield spin data at
every maneuver time if such work was approved. Further,
as the phase center of the main antenna is slightly oﬀset
from the spin axis, a very small (but detectable) sine-
wave signal appears in the high-rate Doppler data. In
principle, this could be used to determine the spin rate for
passes taken after 1993, but it has not been attempted.
Also, the failure of one of the spin-down thrusters pre-
vented precise spin calibration of the Pioneer 11 data.
Because the spin rate of the Pioneers was changing over
the data span, the calibrations also provide an indication
of gas leaks that aﬀect the acceleration of the spacecraft.
A careful look at the records shows how this can be a
problem. This will be discussed in Sections VI A and
VIII F.
IV. BASIC THEOR Y OF SP ACECRAFT
NA VIGATION
Accuracy of modern radio tracking techniques has pro-
vided the means necessary to explore the gravitational
environment in the solar system up to a limit never be-
fore possible [45]. The major role in this quest belongs to
relativistic celestial mechanics experiments with planet s
(e.g., passive radar ranging) and interplanetary space-
craft (both Doppler and range experiments). Celestial
mechanics experiments with spacecraft have been carried
out by JPL since the early 1960’s [46, 47]. The motiva-
tion was to improve both the ephemerides of solar system
bodies and also the knowledge of the solar system’s dy-
namical environment. This has become possible due to
major improvements in the accuracy of spacecraft navi-
gation, which is still a critical element for a number of
space missions. The main objective of spacecraft navi-
gation is to determine the present position and velocity
of a spacecraft and to predict its future trajectory. This
is usually done by measuring changes in the spacecraft’s
position and then, using those measurements, correcting
(ﬁtting and adjusting) the predicted spacecraft trajec-
tory.
In this section we will discuss the theoretical founda-
tion that is used for the analysis of tracking data from
interplanetary spacecraft. We describe the basic physical
models used to determine a trajectory, given the data.
A. Relativistic equations of motion
The spacecraft ephemeris, generated by a numerical
integration program, is a ﬁle of spacecraft positions and
velocities as functions of ephemeris (or coordinate) time
(ET). The integrator requires the input of various param-
eters. These include adopted constants ( c, G, planetary
mass ratios, etc.) and parameters that are estimated
from ﬁts to observational data (e.g., corrections to plan-
etary orbital elements).
The ephemeris programs use equations for point-mass
relativistic gravitational accelerations. They are deriv ed
from the variation of a time-dependent, Lagrangian-
action integral that is referenced to a non-rotating, solar -
system, barycentric, coordinate frame. In addition to
modeling point-mass interactions, the ephemeris pro-
grams contain equations of motion that model terrestrial
and lunar ﬁgure eﬀects, Earth tides, and lunar phys-
ical librations [48]-[50]. The programs treat the Sun,
the Moon, and the nine planets as point masses in the
isotropic, parameterized post-Newtonian, N-body metric
with Newtonian gravitational perturbations from large,
main-belt asteroids.
Responding to the increasing demand of the naviga-
tional accuracy, the gravitational ﬁeld in the solar sys-
tem is modeled to include a number of relativistic ef-
fects that are predicted by the diﬀerent metric theories
of gravity. Thus, within the accuracy of modern exper-
imental techniques, the parameterized post-Newtonian
(PPN) approximation of modern theories of gravity pro-
vides a useful starting point not only for testing these
predictions, but also for describing the motion of self-
gravitating bodies and test particles. As discussed in
detail in [51], the accuracy of the PPN limit (which is
slow motion and weak ﬁeld) is adequate for all foresee-
able solar system tests of general relativity and a number
of other metric theories of gravity. (For the most general
formulation of the PPN formalism, see the works of Will
and Nordtvedt [51, 52].)
For each body i (a planet or spacecraft anywhere in
the solar system), the point-mass acceleration is written
as [41, 42, 48, 53, 54]
¨ri =
∑
j̸=i
µ j(rj − ri)
r3
ij
(
1 − 2(β + γ )
c2
∑
k̸=i
µ k
rik
− 2β − 1
c2
∑
k̸=j
µ k
rjk
− 3
2c2
[ (rj − ri)˙rj
rij
]2
+ 1
2c2 (rj − ri)¨rj − 2(1 + γ )
c2 ˙ri ˙rj +
+ γ
(vi
c
)2
+ (1 + γ )
(vj
c
)2
)
+ 1
c2
∑
j̸=i
µ j
r3
ij
(
[ri − rj )] ·[(2 + 2γ )˙ri − (1 + 2γ )˙rj]
)
(˙ri − ˙rj) + 3 + 4γ
2c2
∑
j̸=i
µ j¨rj
rij
(3)
