# Page 18

18
searches for an aP that is generated by a random pro-
cess. One therefore expects that an aP estimated from
one batch is statistically independent (uncorrelated) fro m
those estimated from other batches. Also, the use of ﬁ-
nite correlation times indicates one is considering an aP
that may show a temporal variation within the data in-
terval. We experimented with a number of possible cor-
relation times and will discuss the corresponding assump-
tions when needed.
In each batch one estimates solutions for the set of de-
sired parameters at a speciﬁed epoch within the batch.
One usually chooses to report solutions corresponding to
the beginning, middle, or end of the batch. General co-
ordinate and time transformations (discussed in Section
IV B) are then used to report the solution in the epoch
chosen for the entire data interval. One may also adjust
the solutions among adjacent batches by accounting for
possible correlations. This process produces a smoothed
solution for the set of solved-for parameters. More de-
tails on this so called “batch–sequential algorithm with
smoothing ﬁlter” are available in Refs. [41]-[43].
Even without process noise, the inversion algorithms of
the Kalman formulation and the weighted least-squares
method seem radically diﬀerent. But as shown in [71],
if one uses a single batch for all the data and if one
uses certain assumptions about, for instance, the pro-
cess noise and the smoothing algorithms, then the two
methods are mathematically identical. When introduc-
ing process noise, an additional process noise matrix is
also added into the solution algorithm. The elements
of this matrix are chosen by the user as prescribed by
standard statistical techniques used for navigational dat a
processing.
For the recent results reported in Section VI, JPL used
both the batch-sequential and the weighted least-squares
estimation approaches. JPL originally implemented only
the batch-sequential method, which yielded the detec-
tion (at a level smaller than could be detected with any
other spacecraft) of an annual oscillatory term smaller in
size than the anomalous acceleration [13]. (This term is
discussed in Section IX C.) The recent studies included
weighted least-squares estimation to see if this annual
term was a calculational anomaly.
The Aerospace Corporation uses only the weighted
least-squares approach with its CHASMP software. A χ 2
test is used as an indicator of the quality of the ﬁt. In this
case, the anomalous acceleration is treated as a constant
parameter over the entire data interval. To solve for aP
one estimates the statistical weights for the data points
and then uses these in a general weighted least-squares
fashion. Note that the weighted least-squares method can
obtain a result similar to that from a batch-sequential ap-
proach (with smoothing ﬁlter, zero correlation time and
without process noise) by cutting the data interval into
smaller pieces and then looking at the temporal variation
among the individual solutions.
As one will see in the following, in the end, both pro-
grams yielded very similar results. The diﬀerences be-
tween them can be mainly attributed to (other) system-
atics. This gives us conﬁdence that both programs and
their implemented estimation algorithms are correct to
the accuracy of this investigation.
V. ORIGINAL DETECTION OF THE
ANOMALOUS ACCELERATION
A. Early JPL studies of the anomalous Pioneer
Doppler residuals
As mentioned in the introduction, by 1980 Pioneer 10
was at 20 AU, so the solar radiation pressure accelera-
tion had decreased to < 5 × 10− 8 cm/s2. Therefore, a
search for unmodeled accelerations (at ﬁrst with the fur-
ther out Pioneer 10) could begin at this level. With the
acceptance of a proposal of two of us (JDA and ELL)
to participate in the Heliospheric Mission on Pioneer 10
and 11, such a search began in earnest [72].
The JPL analysis of unmodeled accelerations used the
JPL’s Orbit Determination Program (ODP) [41]-[42].
Over the years the data continually indicated that the
largest systematic error in the acceleration residuals is a
constant bias of aP ∼ (8 ± 3) × 10− 8 cm/s2, directed to-
ward the Sun (to within the beam-width of the Pioneers’
antennae [73]).
As stated previously, the analyses were modeled to
include the eﬀects of planetary perturbations, radiation
pressure, the interplanetary media, general relativity, t o-
gether with bias and drift in the Doppler signal. Plane-
tary coordinates and the solar system masses were taken
from JPL’s Export Planetary Ephemeris DE405, refer-
enced to ICRF. The analyses used the standard space-
ﬁxed J2000 coordinate system with its associated JPL
planetary ephemeris DE405 (or earlier, DE200). The
time-varying Earth orientation in J2000 coordinates is
deﬁned by a 1998 version of JPL’s EOP ﬁle, which ac-
counts for the inertial precession and nutation of the
Earth’s spin axis, the geophysical motion of the Earth’s
pole with respect to its spin axis, and the Earth’s time
varying spin rate. The three-dimensional locations of
the tracking stations in the Earth’s body-ﬁxed coordi-
nate system (geocentric radius, latitude, longitude) were
taken from a set recommended by ICRF for JPL’s DE405.
Consider ν obs, the frequency of the re-transmitted sig-
nal observed by a DSN antennae, and ν model, the pre-
dicted frequency of that signal. The observed, two-way
anomalous eﬀect can be expressed to ﬁrst order in v/c as
[38]
[ν obs(t) − ν model(t)]DSN = −ν 0
2aP t
c ,
ν model = ν 0
[
1 − 2vmodel(t)
c
]
. (15)
Here, ν 0 is the reference frequency, the factor 2 is because
we use two- and three-way data [36]. vmodel is the mod-
eled velocity of the spacecraft due to the gravitational
