# Page 32

32
using both Sigma and CHASMP. Based on these stud-
ies we conclude that mechanical and phase stability of
the DSN antennae together with geographical locations
of the antennae, geophysical and atmospheric conditions
on the antennae site have negligible eﬀects on our solu-
tions for aP . At most their contributions are at the level
of σ DSN ≤ 10− 5aP .
VIII. SOURCES OF SYSTEMATIC ERROR
INTERNAL TO THE SP ACECRAFT
In this section we will discuss the forces that may be
generated by spacecraft systems. The mechanisms we
consider that may contribute to the found constant ac-
celeration, aP , and that may be caused by the on-board
mechanisms include: (1) the radio beam reaction force,
(2) RTG heat reﬂecting oﬀ the spacecraft, (3) diﬀeren-
tial emissivity of the RTGs, (4) non-isotropic radiative
cooling of the spacecraft, (5) expelled Helium produced
within the RTG, (6) thruster gas leakage, and (7) the dif-
ference in experimental results from the two spacecraft.
A. Radio beam reaction force
The Pioneer navigation does not require that the
spacecraft constantly beam its radio signal, but instead
it does so only when it is requested to do so from the
ground control. Nevertheless, the recoil force due to the
emitted radio-power must also be analyzed.
The Pioneers have a total nominal emitted radio power
of eight Watts. It is parameterized as
Prp =
∫ θmax
0
dθ sin θ P(θ ), (32)
P(θ ) being the antenna power distribution. The radiated
power has been kept constant in time, independent of
the coverage from ground stations. That is, the radio
transmitter is always on, even when not received by a
ground station.
The recoil from this emitted radiation produces an
acceleration bias, brp, on the spacecraft away from the
Earth of
brp = β P rp
M c . (33)
M is taken to be the Pioneer mass when half the fuel is
gone [15]. β is the fractional component of the radiation
momentum that is going in a direction opposite to aP :
β = 1
Prp
∫ θmax
0
dθ sin θ cos θ P(θ ). (34)
Ref [4] describes the HGA and shows its downlink an-
tenna pattern in Fig. 3.6-13. (Thermal antenna expan-
sion mismodeling is thought to be negligible.) The gain
is given as (33 . 3 ± 0. 4) dB at zero (peak) degrees. The
intensity is down by a factor of two ( −3 dB) at 1.8 de-
grees. It is down a factor of 10 ( −10 dB) at 2.7 degrees
and down by a factor of 100 ( −20 dB) at 3.75 degrees.
[The ﬁrst diﬀraction minimum is at a little over four de-
grees.] Therefore, the pattern is a very good conical
beam. Further, since cos[3 . 75◦] = 0 . 9978, we can take
β = (0. 99 ± 0. 01), yielding brp = 1. 10.
Finally, taking the error for the nominal 8 Watts power
to be given by the 0.4 dB antenna error (0 . 10) and the
error due to the uncertainty in our nominal mass (0 . 04),
we arrive at the result
arp = brp ± σ rp = (1. 10 ± 0. 11) × 10− 8 cm/ s2. (35)
B. R TG heat reﬂecting oﬀ the spacecraft
It has been argued that the anomalous acceleration
seen in the Pioneer spacecraft is due to anisotropic heat
reﬂection oﬀ of the back of the spacecraft high-gain an-
tennae, the heat coming from the RTGs [103]. Before
launch, the four RTGs had a total thermal fuel inventory
of 2580 W (now ∼ 2070 W). They produced a total elec-
trical power of 160 W (now ∼ 65 W). Presently ∼ 2000
W of RTG heat must be dissipated. Only ∼ 63 W of
directed power could explain the anomaly. Therefore, in
principle there is enough power to explain the anomaly
this way. However, there are two reasons that preclude
such a mechanism, namely:
i) The spacecraft geometry: The RTGs are located at
the end of booms, and rotate about the spacecraft in a
plane that contains the approximate base of the antenna.
From the closest axial center point of the RTGs, the an-
tenna is seen nearly “edge on” (the longitudinal angular
width is 24.5 o). The total solid angle subtended is ∼ 1-
2% of 4 π steradians [104]. Even though a more detailed
calculation yields a value of 1.5% [105], even taking the
higher bound of 2% means this proposal could provide at
most ∼ 40 W. But there is more [106].
ii) The RTGs’ radiation pattern: The above estimate
was based on the assumption that the RTGs are spher-
ical black bodies. But they are not. The main bodies
of the RTGs are cylinders and they are grouped in two
packages of two. Each package has the two cylinders end
to end extending away from the antenna. Every RTG has
six ﬁns separated by equal angles of 60 degrees that go
radially out from the cylinder. Presumably this results
in a symmetrical radiation of thermal power into space.
Thus, the ﬁns are “edge on” to the antenna (the ﬁns
point perpendicular to the cylinder axes). The largest
opening angle of the ﬁns is seen only by the narrow-angle
parts of the antenna’s outer edges. Ignoring these edge
eﬀects, only ∼2.5% of the surface area of the RTGs is
facing the antenna. This is a factor 10 less than that from
integrating the directional intensity from a hemisphere:
[(
∫ h.sph.
dΩ cos θ )/ (4π )] = 1 / 4. So, one has only 4 W
of directed power. This suggests a systematic bias of
