# Page 10

10
stability of the hydrogen maser and the resolution of the
“resolver.”
Consequently, the JPL Doppler records are not fre-
quency measurements. Rather, they are digitally counted
measurements of the Doppler phase diﬀerence between
the transmitted and received S-band frequencies, divided
by the count time.
Therefore, the Doppler observables, we will refer to,
have units of cycles per second or Hz. Since total count
phase observables are Doppler observables multiplied by
the count interval T c, they have units of cycles. The
Doppler integration time refers to the total counting of
the elapsed periods of the wave with the reference fre-
quency of the hydrogen maser. The usual Doppler in-
tegrating times for the Pioneer Doppler signals refers to
the data sampled over intervals of 10 s, 60 s, 600 s, or
1980 s.
2. Range measurements
A range measurement is made by phase modulating a
signal onto the up-link carrier and having it echoed by the
transponder. The transponder demodulates this ranging
signal, ﬁlters it, and then re-modulates it back onto the
down-link carrier. At the ground station, this returned
ranging signal is demodulated and ﬁltered. An instanta-
neous comparison between the outbound ranging signal
and the returning ranging signal that comes down would
yield the two-way delay. Cross correlating the returned
phase modulated signal with a ground duplicate yields
the time delay. (See [28] and references therein.) As the
range code is repeated over and over, an ambiguity can
exist. The orbit determination programs are then used
to infer (some times with great diﬃculty) the number of
range codes that exist between a particular transmitted
code and its own corresponding received code.
Thus, the ranging data are independent of the Doppler
data, which represents a frequency shift of the radio car-
rier wave without modulation. For example, solar plasma
introduces a group delay in the ranging data but a phase
advance in the Doppler data.
Ranging data can also be used to distinguish an ac-
tual range change from a ﬁctitious range change seen in
Doppler data that is caused by a frequency error [39].
The Doppler frequency integrated over time (the accu-
mulated phase) should equal the range change except for
the diﬀerence introduced by charged particles
3. Inferring position information from Doppler
It is also possible to infer the position in the sky of
a spacecraft from the Doppler data. This is accom-
plished by examining the diurnal variation imparted to
the Doppler shift by the Earth’s rotation. As the ground
station rotates underneath a spacecraft, the Doppler shift
is modulated by a sinusoid. The sinusoid’s amplitude de-
pends on the declination angle of the spacecraft and its
phase depends upon the right ascension. These angles
can therefore be estimated from a record of the Doppler
shift that is (at least) of several days duration. This al-
lows for a determination of the distance to the spacecraft
through the dynamics of spacecraft motion using stan-
dard orbit theory contained in the orbit determination
programs.
C. Data preparation
In an ideal system, all scheduled observations would
be used in determining parameters of physical interest.
However, there are inevitable problems that occur in data
collection and processing that corrupt the data. So, at
various stages of the signal processing one must remove
or “edit” corrupted data. Thus, the need arises for ob-
jective editing criteria. Procedures have been developed
which attempt to excise corrupted data on the basis of
objective criteria. There is always a temptation to elim-
inate data that is not well explained by existing models,
to thereby “improve” the agreement between theory and
experiment. Such an approach may, of course, eliminate
the very data that would indicate deﬁciencies in the a pri-
ori model. This would preclude the discovery of improved
models.
In the processing stage that ﬁts the Doppler samples,
checks are made to ensure that there are no integer cycle
slips in the data stream that would corrupt the phase.
This is done by considering the diﬀerence of the phase
observations taken at a high rate (10 times a second)
to produce Doppler. Cycle slips often are dependent on
tracking loop bandwidths, the signal to noise ratios, and
predictions of frequencies. Blunders due to out-of-lock
can be determined by looking at the original tracking
data. In particular, cycle slips due to loss-of-lock stand
out as a 1 Hz blunder point for each cycle slipped.
If a blunder point is observed, the count is stopped and
a Doppler point is generated by summing the preceding
points. Otherwise the count is continued until a spec-
iﬁed maximum duration is reached. Cases where this
procedure detected the need for cycle corrections were
ﬂagged in the database and often individually examined
by an analyst. Sometimes the data was corrected, but
nominally the blunder point was just eliminated. This
ensures that the data is consistent over a pass. However,
it does not guarantee that the pass is good, because other
errors can aﬀect the whole pass and remain undetected
until the orbit determination is done.
To produce an input data ﬁle for an orbit determina-
tion program, JPL has a software package known as the
Radio Metric Data Selection, Translation, Revision, In-
tercalation, Processing and Performance Evaluation Re-
porting (RMD-STRIPPER) Program. As we discussed
in Section III B 1, this input ﬁle has data that can be in-
tegrated over intervals with diﬀerent durations: 10 s, 60
