# Page 7

7
for downlink.
The S-band frequencies are 2.113 GHz - up and
2.295 GHz - down, a conversion factor of 240/221 at
the Doppler frequency transponder. This conﬁguration
yielded much lower data rates than originally scheduled,
8-16 bps through JOI [27]. Enhancements at the DSN
and reprogramming the ﬂight computers on Galileo in-
creased telemetry bit rate to 8-160 bps, starting in the
spring of 1996.
Currently, two types of Galileo navigation data are
available, namely Doppler and range measurements. As
mentioned before, an instantaneous comparison between
the ranging signal that goes up with the ranging signal
that comes down would yield an “instantaneous” two-
way range delay. Unfortunately, an instantaneous com-
parison was not possible in this case. The reason is that
the signal-to-noise ratio on the incoming ranging signal
is small and a long integration time (typically minutes)
must be used (for correlation purposes). During such
long integration times, the range to the spacecraft is con-
stantly changing. It is therefore necessary to “electron-
ically freeze” the range delay long enough to permit an
integration to be performed. The result represents the
range at the moment of freezing [28, 29].
2. The Ulysses mission
Ulysses was launched on 6 October 1990, also from
the Space Shuttle Discovery, as a cooperative project of
NASA and the European Space Agency (ESA). JPL man-
ages the US portion of the mission for NASA’s Oﬃce of
Space Science. Ulysses’ objective was to characterize the
heliosphere as a function of solar latitude [30]. To reach
high solar latitudes, its voyage took it to Jupiter on 8
February 1992. As a result, its orbit plane was rotated
about 80 degrees out of the ecliptic plane.
Ulysses explored the heliosphere over the Sun’s south
pole between June and November, 1994, reaching maxi-
mum Southern latitude of 80.2 degrees on 13 September
1994. It continued in its orbit out of the plane of the
ecliptic, passing perihelion in March 1995 and over the
north solar pole between June and September 1995. It
returned again to the Sun’s south polar region in late
2000.
The total mass at launch was the sum of two parts: a
dry mass of 333.5 kg plus a propellant mass of 33.5 kg.
The tensor of inertia is given by its principal components
Jxx = 371 . 62, J yy = 205 . 51, J zz = 534 . 98 in units kg m 2.
The maximal cross section is estimated to be 10.056 m 2.
This estimation is based on the radius of the antenna 1.65
m (8.556 m 2) plus the areas of the RTGs and part of the
science compartment (yielding an additional ≈ 1.5 m 2).
The spacecraft was spin-stabilized at 4.996 rpm. The
electrical power is generated by modern RTGs, which
are located much closer to the main bus than are those
of the Pioneers. The power generated at launch was 285
W.
Communications with the spacecraft are performed at
X-band (for downlink at 20 W with a conversion factor
of 880/221) and S-band (both for uplink 2111.607 MHz
and downlink 2293.148 MHz, at 5 W with a conversion
factor of 240/221). Currently both Doppler and range
data are available for both frequency bands. While the
main communication link is S-up/X-down, the S-down
link was used only for radio-science purposes.
Because of Ulysses’ closeness to the Sun and also be-
cause of its construction, any hope to model Ulysses for
small forces might appear to be doomed by solar radia-
tion pressure and internal heat radiation from the RTGs.
However, because the Doppler signal direction is towards
the Earth while the radiation pressure varies with dis-
tance and has a direction parallel the Sun-Ulysses line,
in principle these eﬀects could be separated. And again,
there was range data. This all would make it easier to
model non-gravitational acceleration components normal
to the line of sight, which usually are poorly and not sig-
niﬁcantly determined.
The Ulysses spacecraft spins at ∼ 5 rpm around its
antenna axis (4.996 rpm initially). The angle of the spin
axis with respect to the spacecraft-Sun line varies from
near zero at Jupiter to near 50 degrees at perihelion.
Any on-board forces that could perturb the spacecraft
trajectory are restricted to a direction along the spin axis .
[The other two components are canceled out by the spin.]
As the spacecraft and the Earth travel around the Sun,
the direction from the spacecraft to the Earth changes
continuously. Regular changes of the attitude of the
spacecraft are performed throughout the mission to keep
the Earth within the narrow beam of about one degree
full width of the spacecraft–ﬁxed parabolic antenna.
III. DATA ACQUISITION AND PREP ARATION
Discussions of radio-science experiments with space-
craft in the solar system requires at least a general knowl-
edge of the sophisticated experimental techniques used at
the DSN complex. Since its beginning in 1958 the DSN
complex has undergone a number of major upgrades and
additions. This was necessitated by the needs of particu-
lar space missions. [The last such upgrade was conducted
for the Cassini mission when the DSN capabilities were
extended to cover the Ka radio frequency bandwidth.
For more information on DSN methods, techniques, and
present capabilities, see [31].] For the purposes of the
present analysis one will need a general knowledge of the
methods and techniques implemented in the radio-science
subsystem of the DSN complex.
This section reviews the techniques that are used to
obtain the radio tracking data from which, after analysis,
results are generated. Here we will brieﬂy discuss the
DSN hardware that plays a pivotal role for our study of
the anomalous acceleration.
