# Source Text

- Source: `C:\Users\tigan\Downloads\Clowe_2006_ApJ_648_L109.pdf`
- Generated: `2026-02-16 16:19:20`

## Page 1

L109
The Astrophysical Journal, 648:L109–L113, 2006 September 10
q2006. The American Astronomical Society. All rights reserved. Printed in U.S.A.
A DIRECT EMPIRICAL PROOF OF THE EXISTENCE OF DARK MATTER 1
Douglas Clowe, 2 Marusˇa Bradacˇ,3 Anthony H. Gonzalez, 4 Maxim Markevitch, 5,6
Scott W. Randall, 5 Christine Jones, 5 and Dennis Zaritsky 2
Received 2006 June 6; accepted 2006 August 3; published 2006 August 30
ABSTRACT
W e present new weak-lensing observations of 1E 06572558 ( ), a unique cluster merger , that enable azp0.296
direct detection of dark matter , independent of assumptions regarding the nature of the gravitational force law. Due to
the collision of two clusters, the dissipationless stellar component and theﬂuid-like X-ray–emitting plasma are spatially
segregated. By using both wide-ﬁeld ground-based images andHST/ACS images of the cluster cores, we create
gravitational lensing maps showing that the gravitational potential does not trace the plasma distribution, the dominant
baryonic mass component, but rather approximately traces the distribution of galaxies. An 8jsigniﬁcance spatial
offset of the center of the total mass from the center of the baryonic mass peaks cannot be explained with an alteration
of the gravitational force law and thus proves that the majority of the matter in the system is unseen.
Subject headings:dark matter — galaxies: clusters: individual (1E 06572558) — gravitational lensing
1. INTRODUCTION
We have known since 1937 that the gravitational potentials
of galaxy clusters are too deep to be caused by the detected
baryonic mass and a Newtonian gravitational force law22r
(Zwicky 1937). Proposed solutions either invoke dominant
quantities of nonluminous “dark matter” (Oort 1932) or alter-
ations to either the gravitational force law (Bekenstein 2004;
Brownstein & Moffat 2006) or the particles’ dynamical re-
sponse to it (Milgrom 1983). Previous works aimed at distin-
guishing between the dark matter and alternative gravity hy-
potheses in galaxies (Buote et al. 2002; Hoekstra et al. 2004)
or galaxy clusters (Gavazzi 2002; Pointecouteau & Silk 2005)
have used objects in which the visible baryonic and hypoth-
esized dark matter are spatially coincident, as in most of the
universe. These works favor the dark matter hypothesis, but
their conclusions were necessarily based on nontrivial as-
sumptions such as symmetry, the location of the center of mass
of the system, and/or hydrostatic equilibrium, which left room
for counterarguments. The actual existence of dark matter can
only be conﬁrmed either by a laboratory detection or, in an
astronomical context, by the discovery of a system in which
the observed baryons and the inferred dark matter are spatially
segregated. An ongoing galaxy cluster merger is such a system.
Given sufﬁcient time, galaxies (whose stellar component
makes up∼1%–2% of the mass [Kochanek et al. 2003] under
the assumption of Newtonian gravity), plasma (∼5%–15% of
the mass [Allen et al. 2002; Vikhlinin et al. 2006]), and any
1 Based on observations made with the NASA/ESAHubble Space Telescope
(HST), obtained at the Space Telescope Science Institute, which is operated
by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc., under
NASA contract NAS 5-26555, under program 10200, with the 6.5 m Magellan
telescopes located at Las Campanas Observatory, Chile, with the ESO tele-
scopes at the Paranal Observatory under program IDs 72.A-0511, 60.A-9203,
and 64.O-0332, and with the NASAChandra X-Ray Observatory, operated
by the Smithsonian Astrophysics Observatory under contract to NASA.
2 Steward Observatory, University of Arizona, 933 North Cherry Avenue,
Tucson, AZ 85721; dclowe@as.arizona.edu.
3 Kavli Institute for Particle Astrophysics and Cosmology, P.O. Box 20450,
MS 29, Stanford, CA 94309.
4 Department of Astronomy, University of Florida, 211 Bryant Space Sci-
ence Center, Gainesville, FL 32611.
5 Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics, 60 Garden Street, Cam-
bridge, MA 02138
6 Also at the Space Research Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences, Prof-
soyuznaya 84/32, Moscow 117997, Russia.
dark matter in a typical cluster acquire similar, centrally sym-
metric spatial distributions tracing the common gravitational
potential. However, during a merger of two clusters, galaxies
behave as collisionless particles, while theﬂuid-like X-ray–
emitting intracluster plasma experiences ram pressure. There-
fore, in the course of a cluster collision, galaxies spatially de-
couple from the plasma. We clearly see this effect in the unique
cluster 1E 06572558 (Tucker et al. 1998).
The cluster has two primary galaxy concentrations separated
by 0.72 Mpc on the sky, a less massive ( keV) westernT∼6
subcluster and a more massive ( keV) eastern main clusterT∼14
(Markevitch et al. 2002). Both concentrations have associated
X-ray–emitting plasma offset from the galaxies toward the center
of the system. The X-ray image also shows a prominent bow
shock on the western side of the western plasma cloud, indicating
that the subcluster is currently moving away from the main clus-
ter at∼4700 km s 21. As the line-of-sight velocity difference
between the components is only∼600 km s 21 (Barrena et al.
2002), the merger must be occurring nearly in the plane of the
sky, and the cores passed through each other∼100 Myr ago.
Two galaxy concentrations that correspond to the main clus-
ter and the smaller subcluster have moved ahead of their re-
spective plasma clouds that have been slowed by ram pressure.
This phenomenon provides an excellent setup for our simple
test. In the absence of dark matter, the gravitational potential
will trace the dominant visible matter component, which is the
X-ray plasma. If, on the other hand, the mass is indeed dom-
inated by collisionless dark matter, the potential will trace the
distribution of that component, which is expected to be spatially
coincident with the collisionless galaxies. Thus, by deriving a
map of the gravitational potential, one can discriminate between
these possibilities. We published an initial attempt at this using
an archival Very Large Telescope (VLT) image (Clowe et al.
2004); here we add three additional optical image sets that
allows us to increase the signiﬁcance of the weak-lensing re-
sults by more than a factor of 3.
In this Letter , we measure distances at the redshift of the cluster ,
, by assuming an , , andzp0.296Qp0.3lp0.7Hp70m 0
km s21 Mpc21 cosmology that results in a 4.413 kpc arcsec21 plate
scale. None of the results of this Letter are dependent on this
assumption; changing the assumed cosmology will result in a
change of the distances and absolute masses measured, but the

## Page 2

L110 CLOWE ET AL. Vol. 648
TABLE 1
Optical Imaging Sets
Observation Date
Field of View
(arcmin) Passband
texp
(s)m lim
nd
(arcmin22)
Seeing
(arcsec)
2.2 m ESO/MPG WFI . . . . . . . . 2004 Jan 34#34R14100 23.9 15 0.8
B6580 1.0
V5640 0.9
6.5 m Magellan IMACS . . . . . . 2004 Jan 15 8 (radius)R10800 25.1 35 0.6
B2700 0.9
V2400 0.8
HSTACS:
Subcluster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2004 Oct 21 3.5#3.5 F814W 4944 27.6 87 0.12
F435W 2420
F606W 2336
Main cluster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2004 Oct 21 3.5#3.5 F606W 2336 26.1 54 0.12
Notes.—Limiting magnitudes for completion are given for galaxies and measured by where the number counts depart
from a power law. All image sets had objects detected in the reddest passband available. WFIpWide Field Imager;
IMACSpInamori Magellan Areal Camera and Spectrograph.
relative masses of the various structures in each measurement
remain unchanged.
2. METHODOLOGY AND DATA
We construct a map of the gravitational potential using weak
gravitational lensing (Mellier 1999; Bartelmann & Schneider
2001), which measures the distortions of images of background
galaxies caused by the gravitational deﬂection of light by the
cluster’s mass. This deﬂection stretches the image of the galaxy
preferentially in the direction perpendicular to that of the clus-
ter’s center of mass. The imparted ellipticity is typically com-
parable to or smaller than that intrinsic to the galaxy, and thus
the distortion is only measurable statistically with large num-
bers of background galaxies. To do this measurement, we detect
faint galaxies on deep optical images and calculate an ellipticity
from the second moment of their surface brightness distribu-
tion, correcting the ellipticity for smearing by the point-spread
function (corrections for both anisotropies and smearing are
obtained using an implementation of the KSB technique [Kaiser
et al. 1995] discussed in Clowe et al. 2006). The corrected
ellipticities are a direct, but noisy, measurement of the reduced
shear . The shear is the amount of anisotropicgpg/(12k)g
stretching of the galaxy image. The convergencekis the shape-
independent increase in the size of the galaxy image. In New-
tonian gravity,kis equal to the surface mass density of the
lens divided by a scaling constant. In nonstandard gravity mod-
els,kis no longer linearly related to the surface density but is
instead a nonlocal function that scales as the mass raised to a
power less than one for a planar lens, reaching the limit of
one-half for constant acceleration (Mortlock & Turner 2001;
Zhao et al. 2006). While one can no longer directly obtain a
map of the surface mass density using the distribution ofkin
nonstandard gravity models, the locations of thekpeaks, after
adjusting for the extended wings, correspond to the locations
of the surface mass density peaks.
Our goal is thus to obtain a map ofk. One can combine
derivatives of to obtain (Schneider 1995; Kaiser 1995)g
1 11g g g1g1 2 1, 1 2, 2=ln (12k)p ,( ) ( )2 2 g12g g2g12g2g 2 1 2, 1 1, 21 2
which is integrated over the dataﬁeld and converted into a
two-dimensional map ofk. The observationally unconstrained
constant of integration, typically referred to as the “mass-sheet
degeneracy,” is effectively the true mean of at the ln (12k)
edge of the reconstruction. This method does, however, sys-
tematically underestimatekin the cores of massive clusters.
This results in a slight increase to the centroiding errors of the
peaks, and our measurements ofkin the peaks of the com-
ponents are only lower bounds.
For 1E 06572558, we have accumulated an exceptionally
rich optical data set, which we will use here to measure . Itg
consists of the four sets of optical images shown in Table 1 and
the VLT image set used in Clowe et al. (2004); the additional
images signiﬁcantly increase the maximum resolution obtainable
in thekreconstructions due to the increased number of back-
ground galaxies, particularly in the area covered by the Advanced
Camera for Surveys (ACS) images, with which we measure the
reduced shear. We reduce each image set independently and
create galaxy catalogs with three-passband photometry. The one
exception is the single-passbandHSTpointing of the main cluster,
for which we measure colors from the Magellan images. Because
it is not feasible to measure redshifts for all galaxies in theﬁeld,
we select likely background galaxies using magnitude and color
cuts [ , and not in the rhombus deﬁned bym 1 22 0.5 !814
, , andm2m ! 1.5m2m 1 1.5(m2m)20.25606 814 435 606 606 814
for the ACS images; sim-m2m ! 1.6(m2m)10.4435 606 606 814
ilar for the other image sets] that were calibrated with photo-
metric redshifts from the Hubble Deep Field–South (Fontana et
al. 1999). Each galaxy has a statistical weight based on its sig-
niﬁcance of detection in the image set (Clowe et al. 2006), and
the weights are normalized among catalogs by comparing the
rms-reduced shear measured in a region away from the cores of
the cluster common to allﬁve data sets. To combine the catalogs,
we adopt a weighted average of the reduced shear measurements
and appropriately increase the statistical weight of galaxies that
occur in more than one catalog.
3. ANALYSIS
W e use the combined catalog to create a two-dimensionalk
reconstruction, the central portion of which is shown in Figure 1.
Two major peaks are clearly visible in the reconstruction, one
centered 70.1 east and 60.5 north of the subcluster’s brightest cluster
galaxy (BCG) and detected at 8jsigniﬁcance (as compared to
3jin Clowe et al. 2004), and one centered 20.5 east and 110.5
south of the northern BCG in the main cluster (210.2 west and
170.7 north of the southern BCG) detected at 12j. W e estimate
centroid uncertainties by repeating bootstrap samplings of the
background galaxy catalog, performing akreconstruction with
the resampled catalogs, and measuring the centroid of each peak.

## Page 3

No. 2, 2006 DIRECT EMPIRICAL PROOF OF EXISTENCE OF DARK MATTER L111
Fig.1.—Left panel: Color image from the Magellan images of the merging cluster 1E 06572558, with the white bar indicating 200 kpc at the distance of the
cluster.Right panel: 500 ksChandraimage of the cluster. Shown in green contours in both panels are the weak-lensingkreconstructions, with the outer contour
levels atkp0.16 and increasing in steps of 0.07. The white contours show the errors on the positions of thekpeaks and correspond to 68.3%, 95.5%, and
99.7% conﬁdence levels. The blue plus signs show the locations of the centers used to measure the masses of the plasma clouds in Table 2.
TABLE 2
Component Masses
Component
R.A.
(J2000)
Decl.
(J2000)
MX
(1012 M,)
M∗
(1012 M,) ¯k
Main cluster BCG . . . . . . . . 06 58 35.3255 56 56.3 5.550.6 0.5450.08 0.3650.06
Main cluster plasma . . . . . . 06 58 30.2255 56 35.9 6.650.7 0.2350.02 0.0550.06
Subcluster BCG . . . . . . . . . . 06 58 16.0255 56 35.1 2.750.3 0.5850.09 0.2050.05
Subcluster plasma . . . . . . . . 06 58 21.2255 56 30.0 5.850.6 0.1250.01 0.0250.06
Notes.—Units of right ascension are hours, minutes, and seconds, and units of declination are degrees,
arcminutes, and arcseconds. All values are calculated by averaging over an aperture of 100 kpc radius
around the given position (marked with blue plus signs for the centers of the plasma clouds in Fig. 1);
measurements for the plasma clouds are the residuals left over after the subtraction of the circularly¯k
symmetric proﬁles centered on the BCGs.
Both peaks are offset from their respective BCGs by∼2jbut are
within 1jof the luminosity centroid of the respective component’s
galaxies (both BCGs are slightly offset from the center of galaxy
concentrations). Both peaks are also offset at∼8jfrom the center
of mass of their respective plasma clouds. They are skewed toward
the plasma clouds, and this is expected because the plasma con-
tributes about one-tenth of the total cluster mass (Allen et al. 2002;
Vikhlinin et al. 2006) and a higher fraction in nonstandard gravity
models without dark matter . The skew in eachkpeak toward the
X-ray plasma is signiﬁcant even after correcting for the overlap-
ping wings of the other peak, and the degree of skewness is
consistent with the X-ray plasma contributing of the ob-19%14%28%
servedkin the main cluster and in the subcluster (see112%10%210%
T able 2). Because of the large size of the reconstruction (349or
9 Mpc on a side), the change inkdue to the mass-sheet degeneracy
should be less than 1%, and any systematic effects on the centroid
and skewness of the peaks are much smaller than the measured
error bars.
The projected cluster galaxy stellar mass and plasma mass
within 100 kpc apertures centered on the BCGs and X-ray
plasma peaks are shown in Table 2. This aperture size was
chosen because smaller apertures had signiﬁcantly higherk
measurement errors and because larger apertures resulted in a
signiﬁcant overlap of the apertures. Plasma masses were com-
puted from a multicomponent three-dimensional cluster model
ﬁt to theChandraX-ray image (details of thisﬁt will be given
elsewhere). The emission in theChandraenergy band (mostly
optically thin thermal bremsstrahlung) is proportional to the
square of the plasma density, with a small correction for the
plasma temperature (also measured from the X-ray spectra),
which gives the plasma mass. Because of the simplicity of this
cluster’s geometry, especially at the location of the subcluster,
this mass estimate is quite robust (to a 10% accuracy).
Stellar masses are calculated from theI-band luminosity of
all galaxies equal in brightness or fainter than the component
BCG. The luminosities were converted into mass by assuming
(Kauffmann et al. 2003) . The assumed mass-to-lightM/Lp2I
ratio is highly uncertain (and can vary between 0.5 and 3) and
depends on the history of the recent star formation of the gal-
axies in the apertures; however, even in the case of an extreme
deviation, the X-ray plasma is still the dominant baryonic com-
ponent in all of the apertures. The quoted errors are only the
errors on measuring the luminosity and do not include the
uncertainty in the assumed mass-to-light ratio. Because we did
not apply a color selection to the galaxies, these measurements
are an upper limit on the stellar mass since they include con-
tributions from galaxies not afﬁliated with the cluster.
The meankat each BCG was calculated byﬁtting a two-
peak model, each peak circularly symmetric, to the reconstruc-
tion and subtracting the contribution of the other peak at that
distance. The meankfor each plasma cloud is the excessk
after subtracting off the values for both peaks.
The total of the two visible mass components of the sub-
cluster is greater by a factor of 2 at the plasma peak than at
the BCG; however, the center of the lensing mass is located
near the BCG. The difference in the baryonic mass between
these two positions would be even greater if we excluded the
contribution of the nonpeaked plasma component between the

## Page 4

L112 CLOWE ET AL. Vol. 648
shock front and the subcluster. For the main cluster, we see the
same effect, although the baryonic mass difference is smaller.
Note that both the plasma mass and the stellar mass are de-
termined directly from the X-ray and optical images, respec-
tively, independent of any gravity or dark matter models.
4. DISCUSSION
A key limitation of the gravitational lensing methodology is
that it only produces a two-dimensional map ofkand hence raises
the possibility that structures seen in the map are caused by phys-
ically unrelated masses along the line of sight. Because the back-
ground galaxies reside at a mean , structures capable of pro-z∼1
viding a signiﬁcant amount ofkmust lie at . By comparingz&0.8
the measured shear for galaxies divided into crude redshift bins
using photometric redshifts (Wittman et al. 2003), we further limit
the redshift of the lensing objects to . This range 0.18! z ! 0.39
is consistent with the cluster redshift but corresponds to a large
volume in which a structure unassociated with the cluster could
exist and be projected onto the lensing map. However , the number
density of structures with these lensing strengths in blankﬁeld
surveys is∼1023 arcmin22 for the subcluster (Wittman et al. 2006),
and an order of magnitude less for the main cluster , resulting in
a∼10 27 probability of having two structures within a square arc-
minute of the observed cluster cores. Furthermore, all such lenses
observed in these cosmic shear surveys are clusters with enough
plasma and galaxies to be easily observable. There is no evidence,
however , in our deep imaging of additional cluster-sized concen-
trations of galaxies or of plasma hotter than keV (theT∼0.5
lower bound of theChandraenergy band) near the observed
lensing structures.
Another alternate explanation for the lensing signal is related
to the fact that clusters form at the intersections of matter
ﬁlaments (Bond et al. 1996). In principle, one could imagine
two line-of-sightﬁlaments of intergalactic gas (too cool to be
visible withChandraand too diffuse to have cooled into stars)
extending from the cluster at the locations of the weak-lensing
peaks. To explain the measured surface mass density, such
ﬁlaments would have to be several megaparsecs long, very
narrow, and oriented exactly along the line of sight. The prob-
ability of such an orientation for two suchﬁlaments in theﬁeld
is∼10 26. Furthermore, because the two cluster components are
moving at a relative transverse velocity of 4700 km s 21 com-
pared to the typical peculiar velocities in the cosmic microwave
background frame of a few hundred kilometers per second, the
ﬁlaments could coincide so exactly with each of the BCGs only
by chance. This is an additional factor of∼10 25 reduction in
probability. While such projections become more important in
nonstandard gravity models because the thin lens approxima-
tion breaks down (Mortlock & Turner 2001) and structures
with a given surface density produce a greater amount of lens-
ing the more they are extended along the line of sight, two
such projections would still have a K1028 probability. Finally,
we mention that two other merging clusters, MS 1054203 (Jee
et al. 2005) and A520 (in preparation), exhibit similar offsets
between the peaks of the lensing and baryonic mass, although
based on lensing reconstructions with lower spatial resolution
and less clear-cut cluster geometry.
Aﬁnal possibility is that some alternative gravity models
may be able to suppress the lensing potential of the central
peak in a multiple-peak system, as in Angus et al. (2006). That
work used a model of a gas disk located between two symmetric
mass concentrations representing the galaxy subclusters. In
theirkmap, derived in the tensor-vector-scalar framework (Be-
kenstein 2004), the relative signal from this disk may be sup-
pressed but would still be easily visible with the noise levels
of our reconstruction. Ourkmap, however, shows no evidence
of any mass concentration between the two galaxy subclusters
other than the small perturbations that are consistent with the
gas mass contribution in Newtonian gravity. Furthermore, such
a suppression has also only been shown to work for symmetric
systems that have the central peak directly between the two
outer peaks. In 1E 06572558, however, the X-ray plasma,
which would provide the central peak, lies north of the line
connecting the twokpeaks. Furthermore, the absoluteklevels
of the peaks observed in 1E 06572558 are in good agreement
with those in systems with similar velocity dispersions and X-
ray temperatures (e.g., Clowe & Schneider 2002) that have
coincident gas and galaxies. Thek-to-light ratios are also con-
sistent with those in normal clusters with coincident gas and
galaxies. Therefore, one would need to not only suppress the
inner peak in thekmap relative to the two outer peaks in this
system but also enhance the strength of the outer peaks to make
up for the missing plasma mass.
Any nonstandard gravitational force that scales with bary-
onic mass will fail to reproduce these observations. The lensing
peaks require unseen matter concentrations that are more mas-
sive than, and offset from, the plasma. While the existence of
dark matter removes the primary motivation for alternative
gravity models, it does not preclude nonstandard gravity. The
scaling relation betweenkand surface mass density, however,
has important consequences for models that mix dark matter
with non-Newtonian gravity: to achieve the∼7 : 1 ratio ink
between the dark matter1galaxy component and the plasma
component (Table 2), the true ratio of mass would be even
higher (as high as 49 : 1 for a constant acceleration model,
although modiﬁed Newtonian dynamics [Milgrom 1983] would
not reach this ratio since the dark matter density would become
high enough to shift the acceleration into the quasi-Newtonian
regime), making the need for dark matter even more acute.
Such high concentrations of dark matter, however, are ex-
tremely unlikely based on the measured X-ray plasma tem-
peratures (Markevitch et al. 2002) and cluster galaxy velocity
dispersions (Barrena et al. 2002).
The spatial separation of the dominant baryonic component
in a galaxy cluster from the hypothesized dark matter produced
during a cluster merger has enabled us to directly compare the
dark matter hypothesis to one with only visible matter but a
modiﬁed law of gravity. The observed displacement between
the bulk of the baryons and the gravitational potential proves
the presence of dark matter for the most general assumptions
regarding the behavior of gravity.
We wish to thank Bhuvnesh Jain, Hongsheng Zhao, and Peter
Schneider for useful discussions. This work was supported by
NASA through grant LTSA04-0000-0041 (D. C. and D. Z.).
Support for program 10200 was provided by NASA through
grant GO-10200.01 from the Space Telescope Science Institute,
which is operated by the Association of Universities for Re-
search in Astronomy, Inc., under NASA contract NAS 5-26555.
M. B. acknowledges support from NSF grant AST-0206286.
M. M. acknowledges support fromChandragrant GO4-5152X.

## Page 5

No. 2, 2006 DIRECT EMPIRICAL PROOF OF EXISTENCE OF DARK MATTER L113
REFERENCES
Allen, S. W ., Schmidt, R. W ., & Fabian, A. C. 2002, MNRAS, 334, L11
Angus, G. W ., Famaey, B., & Zhao, H. S. 2006, MNRAS, in press
Barrena, R., Biviano, A., Ramella, M., Falco, E. E., & Seitz, S. 2002, A&A,
386, 816
Bartelmann, M., & Schneider, P. 2001, Phys. Rep., 340, 291
Bekenstein, J. D. 2004, Phys. Rev. D, 70, 083509
Bond, J. R., Kofman, L., & Pogosyan, D. 1996, Nature, 380, 603
Brownstein, J. R., & Moffat, J. W . 2006, MNRAS, 367, 527
Buote, D. A., Jeltema, T . E., Canizares, C. R., & Garmire, G. P. 2002, ApJ,
577, 183
Clowe, D., Gonzalez, A., & Markevitch, M. 2004, ApJ, 604, 596
Clowe, D., & Schneider, P. 2002, A&A, 395, 385
Clowe, D., et al. 2006, A&A, 451, 395
Fontana, A., et al. 1999, A&A, 343, L19
Gavazzi, R. 2002, NewA Rev., 46, 783
Hoekstra, H., Yee, H. K. C., & Gladders, M. D. 2004, ApJ, 606, 67
Jee, M. J., White, R. L., Ford, H. C., Blakeslee, J. P., Illingworth, G. D., Coe,
D. A., & Tran, K.-V . H. 2005, ApJ, 634, 813
Kaiser, N. 1995, ApJ, 439, L1
Kaiser, N., Squires, G., & Broadhurst, T . 1995, ApJ, 449, 460
Kauffmann, G., et al. 2003, MNRAS, 341, 33
Kochanek, C. S., White, M., Huchra, J., Macri, L., Jarrett, T . H., Schneider,
S. E., & Mader, J. 2003, ApJ, 585, 161
Markevitch, M., Gonzalez, A. H., David, L., Vikhlinin, A., Murray, S., Forman,
W ., Jones, C., & Tucker, W . 2002, ApJ, 567, L27
Mellier, Y . 1999, ARA&A, 37, 127
Milgrom, M. 1983, ApJ, 270, 365
Mortlock, D. J., & Turner, E. L. 2001, MNRAS, 327, 557
Oort, J. 1932, Bull. Astron. Inst. Netherlands, 6, 249
Pointecouteau, E., & Silk, J. 2005, MNRAS, 364, 654
Schneider, P. 1995, A&A, 302, 639
Tucker, W ., et al. 1998, ApJ, 496, L5
Vikhlinin, A., Kravtsov, A., Forman, W ., Jones, C., Markevitch, M., Murray,
S. S., & Van Speybroeck, L. 2006, ApJ, 640, 691
Wittman, D., Dell’Antonio, I. P., Hughes, J. P., Margoniner, V . E., Tyson,
J. A., Cohen, J. G., & Norman, D. 2006, ApJ, 643, 128
Wittman, D., Margoniner, V . E., Tyson, J. A., Cohen, J. G., Becker, A. C., &
Dell’Antonio, I. P. 2003, ApJ, 597, 218
Zhao, H., Bacon, D., Taylor, A., & Horne, K. 2006, MNRAS, 368, 171
Zwicky, F. 1937, ApJ, 86, 217
