# Source Text

- Source: `C:\Users\tigan\Downloads\xarv the mcxc1007.1916.pdf`
- Generated: `2026-02-16 16:16:42`

## Page 1

arXiv:1007.1916v1  [astro-ph.CO]  12 Jul 2010
Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. piﬀarettiMCXC cESO 2018
October 24, 2018
The MCXC: a Meta-Catalogue of X-ray detected Clusters of galaxies
R. Piﬀaretti1, M. Arnaud 1, G.W. Pratt1, E. Pointecouteau2 and J.-B. Melin 3
1 Laboratoire AIM, IRFU/Service d’Astrophysique - CEA/DSM - CNRS - Universit´ e Paris Diderot, Bˆ at. 709, CEA-Saclay, F-91191
Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex, France
2 Universit´ e de Toulouse, CNRS, CESR, 9av. du colonel Roche, BP 44346, 31028 Toulouse Cedex 04, France
3 DSM/Irfu/SPP , CEA/Saclay, F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex, France
Received ; accepted
ABSTRACT
We present the compilation and properties of a Meta-Catalogue of X-ray detected Clusters of galaxies, the MCXC. This very large
catalogue is based on publicly available ROSA T All Sky Survey-based (NORAS, REFLEX, BCS, SGP , NEP , MACS, and CIZA)
and serendipitous (160SD, 400SD, SHARC, W ARPS, and EMSS) cluster catalogues. Data have been systematically homogenised
to an overdensity of 500, and duplicate entries originating from overlaps between the survey areas of the individual input catalogues
are carefully handled. The MCXC comprises 1743 clusters with virtually no duplicate entries. For each cluster the MCXC provides:
three identiﬁers, a redshift, coordinates, membership of original catalogue, and standardised 0.1−2.4 keV band luminosityL 500, total
massM 500, and radiusR 500. The meta-catalogue additionally furnishes information on overlaps between the input catalogues and the
luminosity ratios when measurements from diﬀerent surveys are available, and also gives notes on individual objects. The MCXC is
available in electronic format for maximum usefulness in X-ray, SZ, and multi-wavelength studies.
Key words. Catalogs, Cosmology: observations, Cosmology: large-scale structure of Universe, Galaxies: cluster: general - X-rays:
galaxies: clusters
1. Introduction
Clusters of galaxies provide cosmological constraints through
the number density and evolution of objects, through the power
spectrum of their three-dimensional distribution, and through
their baryon fraction and its evolution. Moreover, the physical
properties of clusters provide a test of the structure formation
scenario, giving vital information both for understanding the
gravitational collapse of the dark matter and for the evolution
of baryons in the dark matter potential (see V oit 2005, for a re-
view).
X-ray observations are ideal for these studies as the den-
sity squared dependence of the X-ray emission means that clus-
ters can eﬃciently be found over a wide redshift range. Cluster
sources were evident in theﬁrst all-sky X-ray survey with
Uhuru, and further objects were found by HEAO-1 andAriel-V;
subsequent follow-up observations withEinsteinandEXOSAT
allowed more accurate characterisation of their physical proper-
ties (see Rosati et al. 2002, for a review).
In this context, the ROSA T satellite has played a central role.
The 1990-1991 ROSA T All-Sky Survey (RASS, V oges et al.
1999) and later deep pointed observations have led to the discov-
ery of hundreds of clusters. Subsequent follow-up observations,
in particular those conducted with the current generation of X-
ray satellitesXMM-Newton,ChandraandSuzaku, have provided
statistical samples for cosmological studies (e.g., Vikhlinin et al.
2009; Mantz et al. 2009) and detailed information on the struc-
tural properties of the cluster population (e.g., Vikhlinin et al.
2006; Pratt et al. 2010; Arnaud et al. 2010). Other observations
have allowed in-depth study of the hierarchical assembly process
Send oﬀprint requests to: R. Piﬀaretti, e-mail:
rocco.piffaretti@cea.fr
through merging (e.g., Markevitch & Vikhlinin 2007) and the
physical mechanisms associated with feedback and its impact
on structure formation (e.g., McNamara & Nulsen 2007, and
references therein). However, while severalXMM-Newtonand
ChandraX-ray surveys are ongoing (e.g., Romer et al. 2001;
Barkhouse et al. 2006; Pacaud et al. 2007; Fassbender 2007) 1,
the associated cluster catalogues are either not yet published or
only partially available.
Outside of the X-ray domain, the redshift-independent ther-
mal Sunyaev-Zel’dovich eﬀect (Sunyaev & Zel’dovich 1972,
hereafter SZ) is emerging as an eﬃcient way to detect distant,
massive clusters that fall below theﬂux limits of X-ray sur-
veys. Several SZ surveys, including the South Pole Telescope
(SPT, Carlstrom et al. 2009) survey, the Atacama Cosmology
Telescope (ACT, Fowler et al. 2007), and Planck (Tauber et al.
2010), are actively ongoing and have started providing theﬁrst
SZ-selected cluster catalogues (e.g., V anderlinde et al. 2010;
Menanteau et al. 2010). X-ray observations of SZ clusters are
important in many respects. The X-ray properties allow a bet-
ter characterisation of the SZ signal (e.g., Melin et al. 2006;
Andersson et al. 2010) and yield the calibration of the scaling re-
lations needed for cosmological studies with SZ-selected cluster
samples (e.g., Majumdar & Mohr 2003). In addition, X-ray ob-
servations allow testing of the selection function of SZ surveys
and veriﬁcation of new SZ cluster candidates (e.g., ˇSuhada et al.
2010). Moreover, they are essential for statistical analyses of the
SZ data (e.g., Melin et al. 2010; Komatsu et al. 2010, and refer-
ences therein).
1 Seehttp://cxc.harvard.edu/xraysurveys/surveys.html
for a complete list of ongoingXMM-NewtonandChandrasurveys.
1

## Page 2

R. Piﬀaretti et al.: The MCXC
Cosmological tests that rely on knowledge of the evolution
of the mass function or baryon fraction require an estimate of
the cluster mass. Surveys provide only an observable (typically
luminosity, temperature or SZy-parameter) that is then linked to
the cluster mass via scaling relations. While simultaneous con-
straints on cosmological parameters and scaling relations have
recently been derived (Mantz et al. 2009), the mass proxy re-
lations are typically separately calibrated using deep observa-
tions of well-understood and if possible representative samples
(e.g., Arnaud et al. 2007; Maughan 2007; Vikhlinin et al. 2009;
Pratt et al. 2009). Although their redshift evolution is at present
poorly known, a consensus on the type of scaling relations to
be calibrated and their precise deﬁnition has been reached. For
example, the bias introduced by cool core clusters in luminosity
and temperature measurements is taken into account, low scatter
mass proxies such asY X (Kravtsov et al. 2006) or the gas mass
Mgas are widely used, and all quantities are measured up to a
standard characteristic radiusR 500, the radius within which the
mean over-density of the cluster is 500 times the critical den-
sity at the clusters redshift. Substantial progress has also been
made in understanding the systematics aﬀecting X-ray mass esti-
mates via simulations (e.g., Rasia et al. 2006; Nagai et al. 2007a;
Piﬀaretti & V aldarnini 2008) and via combination with gravi-
tational lensing (e.g., Mahdavi et al. 2008; Zhang et al. 2010;
Meneghetti et al. 2010).
ROSA T-derived catalogues still play a major role in provid-
ing targets for deeper observation with the current generation of
X-ray instruments (e.g., B¨ ohringer et al. 2007; Vikhlinin et al.
2009), and for identiﬁcation of existing clusters in new sur-
veys in other wavelength bands (e.g., Popesso et al. 2004). These
catalogues have been derived from a number of surveys based
on RASS data or ROSA T pointed observations (see Sect. 2).
Despite the fact that these catalogues are public, no attempt has
yet been made to merge them and to homogenise the data con-
tained within. The main reasons for this are their large sizes and
the fact that diﬀerent catalogues provide diﬀerent types of infor-
mation.
Given the current status of X-ray cluster catalogues, and the
relevance of scaling relations for SZ surveys and X-ray studies
in general, we collected data from all the major public X-ray
survey catalogues and homogenised the information to provide
the community with a meta-catalogue of X-ray detected clus-
ters of galaxies (hereafter the MCXC). The basic characteris-
tics of the MCXC are the large number of clusters in the cata-
logue (1743 unique systems), a uniform format for all provided
quantities, careful control of duplicate entries originating from
overlaps between the input catalogues, and homogeneously es-
timated 0.1−2.4 keV band luminositiesL 500 and total masses
M500. In order to be easily manipulated, the MCXC is provided
in electronic format. Theﬁnal catalogue gives aﬁrst overview of
the published, publicly-available X-ray survey selected cluster
population.
The paper is organised as follows. In Sect. 2 we describe the
basic properties of the catalogues used to construct the MCXC.
In Sect. 3 we explain how the information is homogenised and
detail the quantities provided by the MCXC. The handling of
duplicate entries is presented in Sect. 4 and in Sect. 5 we discuss
various aspects of theﬁnal catalogue. In Sect. 6 we summarize
our results and present our conclusions.
As a cosmological model we adopt aΛCDM cosmology
withH 0 =70 km/s/Mpc,Ω M =0.3 andΩ Λ =0.7 throughout
the paper. The quantityh(z) is the ratio of the Hubble constant at
redshiftzto its present value,H 0, i.e.,h(z) 2 =Ω m(1+z) 3 +Ω Λ.
2. Input X-ray catalogues
In the following we describe the input catalogues used to con-
struct the MCXC. We recall the basic characteristics of the X-
ray surveys used to construct each catalogue and how the X-ray
quantities adopted in our work are measured. We discuss only
X-ray information essential to the MCXC and focus on the quan-
tities that allow us to compute the luminosities,L 500. For more
details on the individual surveys, and in particular the associated
optical observations/followup, we refer the reader to the cited
papers and references therein.
Generally speaking, two types of X-ray survey can be dis-
tinguished : contiguous area surveys, which use data from
the ROSA T All-Sky Survey (RASS, V oges et al. 1999), and
serendipitous cluster surveys, which are based on data from
deeper pointed X-ray observations. In the following, we there-
fore distinguish between RASS-based and serendipitous cata-
logues. In addition to handling duplicate entries and removing
particular clusters as discussed below, we exclude clusters with
non measured redshifts or luminosities. Table 1 summarises the
contributions of the various input catalogues to the MCXC.
The bulk of the X-ray data used to construct the MCXC are
derived from ROSA T observations. Exceptions are EMSS and
some physical quantities for MACS, as described in more detail
below. Future work will include as-yet unpublished catalogues
such as RDCS (the ROSA T Deep Cluster Survey, Rosati et al.
1998), XCS (the XMM Cluster Survey, Romer et al. 2001),
XDCP (the XMM-Newton Distant Cluster Project, Fassbender
2007), and the complete MACS catalogue (Ebeling et al. 2001).
2.1. RASS-based catalogues
We compiled data from nine RASS-based contiguous area sur-
veys, as described below.
2.1.1. REFLEX and NORAS
REFLEX(ROSA T-ESO Flux Limited X-ray Galaxy Cluster
Survey, B¨ ohringer et al. 2004a) is based on RASS data for a
survey area covering the southern sky up to a declinationδ=
2.5 deg with the galactic plane (|b|≤20 deg) and the regions of
the Magellanic clouds excluded. The total survey area is 13924
deg2 and the survey isﬂux-limited (0.1−2.4 keV bandﬂux
≥3×10 −12 erg s−1 cm−2).
NORAS(Northern ROSA T All-Sky galaxy cluster survey
B¨ ohringer et al. 2000a) is also based on RASS data excluding
the same region around the galactic plane, but covers the north-
ern sky. This survey catalogue is notﬂux-limited and selection
is based on minimum count rate (0.06 cts/s in the 0.1−2.4 keV
band) and a source extent likelihood.
The data analysis and catalogue production for both NORAS
and REFLEX are performed by essentially the same authors and,
although REFLEX has been more extensively studied and char-
acterised than NORAS, the information provided is extremely
similar. A growth curve analysis is adopted to determine source
ﬂuxes (the typicalﬂux measurement accuracy is 10−20%) and
luminosities. The REFLEX catalogue provides aperture lumi-
nositiesL ap as well as total luminosities. The latter are com-
puted by estimating the missingﬂux outside the detection aper-
ture by assuming aβ-model withβ=2/3, a core radiusr c which
scales with mass, and a cluster extent of 12×r c. For the NORAS
clusters a similar procedure is performed, but the resulting total
luminosities are not reported. Therefore the NORAS catalogue
provides only aperture luminosities.
2

## Page 3

R. Piﬀaretti et al.: The MCXC
For both catalogues data (B¨ ohringer et al. 2000b, 2004b) are
retrieved from VizieR 2. Because of the homogeneity of these
two catalogues we merge them into a single NORAS/REFLEX
catalogue. The namesNORASandREFLEXare kept as sub-
catalogue labels. Because of the overlap of the NORAS and
REFLEX survey areas, there are ten duplicate entries. For these
ten clusters the information provided by NORAS and REFLEX
is almost identical and we exclude, for each of the duplicates,
the cluster with the largerﬂux uncertainty.
Since the number of clusters in the combined
NORAS/REFLEX catalogue is large (889 objects, see Table
1) and because the information provided by the authors is
homogeneous and detailed, it is the cornerstone of the MCXC.
2.1.2. ROSA T BCS and eBCS
TheROSAT BCS(The ROSA T Brightest Cluster Sample,
Ebeling et al. 1998) comprises the brighter sources of the
NORAS survey. We use data for the 90 per cent complete
BCS, aﬂux-limited sample (0.1−2.4 keV bandﬂux≥4.4×
10−12 erg s−1 cm−2) ofz≤0.3 clusters.
TheeBCS(The extended ROSA T Brightest Cluster Sample,
Ebeling et al. 2000a) is the lowﬂux extension of the BCS (0.1−
2.4 keV bandﬂux≥2.8×10 −12 erg s−1 cm−2).
The type of information provided is the same for both sam-
ples. In both cases detection and cluster emission characteri-
sation are based upon the V oronoi tesselation and percolation
(VTP) algorithm. The emission outside the detection region is
computed by correcting the detected count rate. For clusters this
is undertaken by assuming aβ-model proﬁle withβ=2/3 and a
core radius estimated from the source proﬁle, taking into account
the telescope PSF. The resulting total luminosities, the corrected
and uncorrected count rates, and the VTP aperture radius are
provided. This implies that the luminosity within the VTP aper-
ture radius can be computed for all the clusters in the sample.
Data (Ebeling et al. 2000b,c) are retrieved from VizieR and
merged into a single BCS catalogue where the namesBCSand
eBCSare kept as sub-catalogue labels (see Table 1). Note that
there is only one cluster, A1758a, that is listed in both BCS and
eBCS. The two luminosities are almost identical and we remove
it from the BCS sub-catalogue. In addition, for the Virgo cluster
we adopt the luminosity estimate of B¨ ohringer et al. (1994).
2.1.3. SGP
TheSGP(A Catalog of Clusters of Galaxies in a Region of
1 Steradian around the South Galactic Pole, Cruddace et al.
2002a) covers a region of 1.013 sr centered on the south Galactic
pole and is based on the same X-ray source detection and char-
acterisation procedures as REFLEX. The lowest detectedﬂux is
1.5×10 −12 erg s−1 cm−2 in the 0.1−2.4 keV band, and a com-
plete sub-sample can be obtained by imposing aﬂux limit of
3×10 −12 erg s−1 cm−2.
Luminosities are computed within a cutoﬀradius provided
by the growth curve analysis. Since the cutoﬀradius is not given
in the catalogue, we treat the quoted luminosity as the total lu-
minosity.
Data for the entire non-ﬂux-limited, SGP sample
(Cruddace et al. 2002b, 2003) were retrieved from VizieR.
2 http://VizieR.u-strasbg.fr/viz-bin/VizieR
2.1.4. NEP
TheNEP(The ROSA T North Ecliptic Pole survey, Henry et al.
2006) surrounds the north ecliptic pole in a survey area of 80.6
deg2, and has the deepest exposure in the northern RASS (ex-
posure times from 2 000 to over 40 000 s). Source detection is
based on V oges et al. (1999) and the selection is performed by
adopting thresholds for the source extent likelihood and signal-
to-noise ratio.
The quoted total luminosities are computed from size cor-
rectedﬂuxes. The latter are computed from detectedﬂuxes
within apertures of radius 5’ (6.5’ for RXJ1834.1+7057) by as-
suming a PSF-correctedβ-proﬁle withβ=2/3 and aﬁxed core
radius of 180 kpc. The proﬁle is integrated up toR 200, which
is estimated from the size-temperature relation of Evrard et al.
(1996). Size correction factors are provided so that aperture lu-
minosities can be computed.
Data for the wholeﬂux-limited sample (0.5−2 keV bandﬂux
≥2.×10 −14 erg s−1 cm−2, Henry et al. 2006) were retrieved from
VizieR, and only sources identiﬁed as clusters were selected (see
Table 1).
2.1.5. MACS
TheMACS(Massive Cluster Survey, Ebeling et al. 2001) is
based on the ROSA T Bright Source Catalogue with the aim of
increasing the number of known very luminous,z≥0.3 clus-
ters. A MACS catalogue has not yet been published in its en-
tirety and we therefore collected data from diﬀerent publications
as detailed below. Notice that the data reported in these publi-
cations are based onChandrafollow-up observations and that
these publications yield all publicly-available MACS clusters
with coordinates, redshifts, and luminosities (i.e., the minimal
set of quantities required for the MCXC).
Properties of a complete subsample ofz>0.5 MACS clus-
ters (theMACS DISTsub-catalogue, twelve objects) are listed in
Ebeling et al. (2007). A further complete subsample of bright
objects in the 0.3<z<0.5 redshift range (theMACS BRIGHT
sub-catalogue, 34 clusters) are given in Ebeling et al. (2010).
For these sources, the luminosities withinR 200 are listed. For
32 of the 34MACS BRIGHTclusters Mantz et al. (2009) give ad-
ditional properties such asL 500,M 500, etc 3. This information is
also merged into theMACS BRIGHTsub-catalogue.
Further MACS clusters are analysed in Maughan et al.
(2008, theMACS MJFVsub-catalogue, 23 objects), who provide
very complete information on the physical properties of these
objects. Of theMACS MJFVsample there are six clusters in com-
mon with theMACS DISTsub-catalogue and twelve clusters in
common with theMACS BRIGHTsub-catalogue. We construct a
unique MACS catalogue by merging the three sub-catalogues
and keeping only measurements given by Maughan et al. (2008)
for the eighteen duplicate clusters (see Table 1). Apart from
the sixMACS DISTluminosity measurements in Ebeling et al.
(2007), the luminositiesL 500 are directly available for all MACS
clusters.
2.1.6. CIZA
TheCIZA(Clusters in the Zone of Avoidance, Ebeling et al.
2002 and Kocevski et al. 2007, respectivelyCIZAIand
CIZAII) catalogues are based on the ROSA T Bright Source
3 MACSJ0358.8-2955 and MACSJ2311.5+0338 are not studied in
Mantz et al. (2009).
3

## Page 4

R. Piﬀaretti et al.: The MCXC
Catalogue and focus on the region around the galactic plane
(|b|≤20 deg). Candidate selection is based on limits on the
detectedﬂuxes and spectral hardness ratios. CIZAI comprises
the X-raybrightest objects (ﬂux≥5.×10 −12 erg s−1 cm−2), while
CIZAII is its low-ﬂux extension (ﬂux≥3.×10 −12 erg s−1 cm−2).
Quoted luminosities are computed from raw RASS data us-
ing very large apertures and can be therefore safely interpreted
as total luminosities.
The type of data available for the two catalogues is identi-
cal, and after retrieving data (Ebeling et al. 2002; Kocevski et al.
2007) from VizieR, we merged them into a single CIZA cat-
alogue where the namesCIZAIandCIZAIIdeﬁne the sub-
catalogues (see Table 1).
2.2. Serendipitous catalogues
We compiled data from a further seven serendipitous surveys as
described below.
2.2.1. 160SD
The160SD(The 160 Square Degree ROSA T Survey,
Mullis et al. 2003) is based on the serendipitous detection of ex-
tended X-ray emission in 647 archival ROSA T PSPC observa-
tions. With the galactic plane (|b|≤30 deg) and the regions
of the Magellanic clouds excluded, the resulting sky coverage at
highﬂuxes is 160 deg 2.
A wavelet algorithm is used to detect galaxy clusters and the
quoted total luminosities are computed from the detectedﬂuxes
by assuming aβ-proﬁle withβ=2/3 and aﬁtted core radius.
We retrieved the full dataset (Mullis et al. 2003) from VizieR
and selected only sources identiﬁed as galaxy clusters.
2.2.2. 400SD
The400SD(The 400 Square Degree ROSA T PSPC Galaxy
Cluster Survey, Burenin et al. 2007) extends the 160SD method-
ology to additional PSPC observations by adopting less restric-
tive selection criteria (e.g., galactic latitude and absorption, ex-
posure times). A total of 1610ﬁelds, corresponding to a total
survey area of 397 deg2, are analysed to yield a largeﬂux-limited
(0.5−2 keV bandﬂux≥1.4×10 −13 erg s−1 cm−2) cluster cat-
alogue. 400SD data is available for serendipitously and not en-
tirely serendipitously detected clusters (clusters at redshift very
close to the target redshift).
We retrieved data (Burenin et al. 2009) from VizieR, and
merged the information into a unique 400SD catalogue, intro-
ducing the sub-catalogue labels400SD SERand400SD NONSER
to distinguish between the two classes of objects (see Table 1).
2.2.3. SHARC Bright and SHARC Southern
The SHARC survey is based on archival ROSA T PSPC observa-
tions. TheSHARC Bright(Bright Serendipitous High-Redshift
Archival ROSA T Cluster survey, Romer et al. 2000a) is a wide
area shallow survey covering a total area of 178.6 deg 2 with a
ﬂux limit of 1.63×10 −13 erg s−1 cm−2. TheSHARC Southern
(The Southern Serendipitous High-Redshift Archival ROSA T
Cluster survey, Burke et al. 2003a) is a narrow area deep survey
covering 17.7 deg2 with aﬂux limit of 4.66×10 −14 erg s−1 cm−2.
Cluster detection is based on a wavelet and sliding-box tech-
niques, respectively.
T able 1.Number of clusters in the catalogues used to construct
the MCXC before and after handling of multiple entries.
CatalogueNr. of clusters Nr. of clusters
Sub-catalogues Input MCXC
NORAS/REFLEX889 879
NORAS 445 437
REFLEX 444 442
400SD 266 256
400SD SER 242 236
400SD NONSER 24 20
160SD 199 90
BCS 312 80
BCS 205 47
eBCS 107 33
SGP 157 55
SHARC 69 30
SHARC SOUTH 37 14
SHARC BRIGHT 32 16
W ARPS 159 78
W ARPS 34 11
W ARPSII 125 67
NEP 63 48
MACS 51 38
MACS MJFV 23 18
MACS BRIGHT 22 14
MACS DIST 6 6
CIZA 130 128
CIZAI 73 72
CIZAII 57 56
EMSS 102 61
EMSS 1994 81 47
EMSS 2004 21 14
TOTAL 2397 1743
For both catalogues aβ-proﬁle withﬁxedβ=2/3 andr c
is used to determine the total luminosity and a circular aperture
of radiusr 80, which contains 80 percent of the totalﬂux. This
implies that in addition to the extrapolated total luminosities, the
aperture luminositiesL ap ≡L(<r 80) are available.
Data (Burke et al. 2003b; Romer et al. 2000b) are retrieved
from VizieR and merged into a single SHARC catalogue (only
sources identiﬁed as clusters are selected from Romer et al.
(2000b)) with sub-catalogues labelledSHARC SOUTHand
SHARC BRIGHT(see Table 1).
2.2.4. WARPS and WARPSII
The W ARPS survey is also based on ROSA T PSPC observations.
W ARPS(Wide Angle ROSA T Pointed Survey, Perlman et al.
2002a), covers 16.2 deg 2 in 86 PSPCﬁelds, while its extension
W ARPSII(Wide Angle ROSA T Pointed Survey II, Horner et al.
2008) covers 56.7 deg 2 in 301 PSPCﬁelds. The W ARPS survey
4

## Page 5

R. Piﬀaretti et al.: The MCXC
uses the VTP algorithm for cluster detection and characteriza-
tion.
The quoted total luminosities are computed as in
Ebeling et al. (1998), but no information which allows the
computation of aperture luminosities is reported.
Data (Perlman et al. 2002b; Horner et al. 2009) are retrieved
from VizieR. For both catalogues we include clusters below the
nominalﬂux limit that deﬁnes the statistically complete sample.
The two catalogues are merged into a single W ARPS catalogue
andWARPSIandWARPSIIare adopted as sub-catalogue labels
(see Table 1).
2.2.5. EMSS
TheEMSS(Einstein Observatory Extended Medium Sensitivity
Survey, Gioia et al. 1990) cluster catalogue is constructed from
aﬂux-limited sample of sources serendipitously detected in
EinsteinIPC (Imaging Proportional Counter)ﬁelds at high
galactic latitudes.
Data are compiled from the tables published in
Gioia & Luppino (1994) and Henry (2004). While the sample
presented in Gioia & Luppino (1994) is the most complete and
up-to-date work on the entire EMSS cluster catalogue, Henry
(2004) provides more reliable ASCA measurements for the
z≥0.3 EMSS clusters. TheEinsteinluminosities reported in
Gioia & Luppino (1994) are computed from theﬂux measured
in a 2.′4 x 2.′4 detection cell by adopting aβ-model withﬁxed
β=2/3. The information provided is not suﬃcient to compute
aperture luminosities from the quoted total luminosities. The
ASCA luminosities in Henry (2004) are total luminosities. Since
distant clusters are not resolved by ASCA, these luminosities
were derived by assuming that the clusters are point sources.
Hence in this case only total luminosities are available.
Clusters in the Henry (2004) sample are removed
from Gioia & Luppino (1994) 4. We remove MS1209.0+3917,
MS1333.3+1725, and MS1610.4+6616 for the reasons men-
tioned in Henry (2004). The data are then merged into a single
EMSS catalogue where the namesEMSS 1994andEMSS 2004
denote the sub-catalogue labels (see Table 1).
3. Data extraction and homogenisation
The data provided by the diﬀerent input catalogues (positions,
redshifts, names, luminosities, etc.) are rather similar. However
some data homogenisation is needed, in particular for quantities
such as luminosity and mass.
As detailed above, in many cases the luminosity is measured
within some small apertureR ap (Lap ≡L(<R ap)) is the cor-
responding aperture luminosity) and then extrapolated to some
larger radius using a reasonable model of the surface brightness
proﬁle. The radial extrapolation might be extremely large, im-
plying that the derived luminosity is basically equal to the total
luminosityL tot =L(<∞). Another common choice is to ex-
trapolate toR 200. In this case the luminosityL 200 ≡L(<R 200)
is essentially equal toL tot, since the contribution to the total lu-
minosity of the emission betweenR 200 and inﬁnity is fully neg-
ligible. With the present generation of X-ray observations, the
standard choice isR 500 (L500 ≡L(<R 500)), and we have chosen
this radius for the MCXC data homogenisation procedure.
The assumed cosmological model is of course at the basis of
our homogenisation procedure. In the following all luminosities
4 For a comparison between EMSS and ASCAﬂux measurements
see Henry (2004).
and other cluster parameters which depend on the distance scale
are converted to our reference cosmology (i.e.Ω M =0.3,Ω Λ =
0.7, andH 0 =70 km/s/Mpc).
Below we list all the quantities that are provided by the
MCXC and explain in detail how they are derived from the
original information in the input catalogues. The names of the
quantities as given in the associated electronic table are given in
typewritertypeface. MCXC clusters are ordered by right as-
cension. As an example we list theﬁrst 40 entries by splitting
the information into Tables 2 and 3.
3.1. Coordinates and redshifts
The cluster coordinates given in the input catalogues are those
of the cluster centroid determined from X-ray data (apart from
those in the sub-catalogueEMSS 1994which are the coordi-
nates of the cluster optical position). For the MCXC, all coor-
dinates are converted to right ascension and declination for the
epoch J2000 in hours (degrees), minutes, and seconds (RAJ2000
andDEJ2000) and in units of decimal degrees ( RAJ2000and
DEJ2000). We also provide the cluster positions in galactic co-
ordinates –GLONandGLATare galactic longitude and latitude,
respectively, in degrees (see Table 2).
No manipulation is needed for the cluster redshiftsz. As
stated above, only clusters with measured redshift are retained
in the MCXC (see Table 2). In Fig. 1, we show the redshift his-
tograms of the individual input catalogues used to construct the
MCXC and of the MCXC after handling of multiple entries (see
Sect. 4). The histograms highlight the diﬀerent redshift ranges
typically probed by serendipitous and RASS-based surveys, with
the latter generally being conﬁned to local and medium redshift
clusters.
3.2. Names
Two types of cluster name are usually listed in the input cat-
alogues: the name assigned by the authorsNAME, and the al-
ternative nameNAME ALT(see Table 2).NAMEis usually con-
structed from the cluster coordinates (e.g., RXJ0041.1-2339
in 160SD, MS0007.2-3532 in EMSS, MACSJ0011.7-1523 in
MACS, RXC J0000.1+0816 in NORAS/REFLEX, CIZA, and
SGP , RX J1716.6+6410 in NEP and SHARC, J0022.0+0422
in W ARPS). Exceptions to this format are BCS and 400SD.
BCS names are listed as they appear in optical catalogues (e.g.
ZwCl1432, A602), while in the 400SD, names are not as-
signed. We therefore assigned aNAMEto400SD SERclusters ac-
cording to the standard SIMBAD 5 format acronym ’BVH2007
NNN’ (Burenin+Vikhlinin+Hornstrup+, 2007, e.g., BVH2007
193), and for the400SD NONSERwe created a new acronym
’BVH2007 NS NNN’ (e.g., BVH2007 NS 12). For all but the
400SD clusters we retain the original names as listed in the in-
put catalogues.
Alternative names in the input catalogues are mostly based
on cataloged optical counterparts to the X-ray sources (e.g.
A2894, ZwCl 0104.9+5350, UGC 12890). In some cases alter-
native names are given as notes or comments, and we also use
this information to constructNAME ALTin the MCXC by extract-
ing the suitable piece of information. Alternative names are ho-
mogenised so as to match both SIMBAD and NED 6 standards.
When this is not possible we choose the SIMBAD acronym con-
ventions. Moreover, when multiple alternative names are avail-
5 http://simbad.u-strasbg.fr/simbad/
6 http://nedwww.ipac.caltech.edu/
5

## Page 6

R. Piﬀaretti et al.: The MCXC
Fig. 1.Redshift histograms of the input catalogues used to construct the MCXC and of the MCXC after handling of multiple entries.
Diﬀerent area shadings are used for RASS-based, serendipitous, and MCXC catalogues.
able, they are listed separated with a comma. For BCS clusters
we setNAME ALTequal toNAME. For 160SD and 400SD clus-
ters alternative names are extracted from the notes. For 160SD
clusters the identiﬁer ’VMF98 NNN’ is also used.
Notice that in most of the input catalogues alternative names
end with letters for double systems (e.g., A2384 (A), A3574E,
etc.). Such information is important because it indicates whether
the measured luminosity refers to the whole system to only a
part of it.
Our choice of formats forNAMEandNAME ALTin the MCXC
is made in order to facilitate queries in the SIMBAD and NED
databases. Notice that bothNAMEandNAME ALTalso facilitate
the handling of duplicate entries as discussed extensively below
in Sect. 4.
In addition to the above two cluster identiﬁers we add a third
name,NAME MCXC(see Table 2), that is constructed from co-
ordinates for the epoch J2000. It allows a fully unambiguous
cluster identiﬁcation in the MCXC catalogue and is deﬁned as
MCXC JHHMM.m+DDMM.
3.3. Catalogue and Sub-catalogue
As explained above in Sect. 2 and listed in Table 1, for each
cluster the input catalogue and sub-catalogue names are given
inCATALOGUEandSUB CATALOGUE(see Table 2). If no sub-
catalogue exists the sub-catalogue name is equal to the catalogue
name.
3.4. Luminosities
The luminosities are homogenised according to the following
procedure:
1. When necessary, weﬁrst convert the input luminosity (e.g.,
0.5−2 keV band inNEP, bolometric inMACS MJFV, 0.3−
3.5 keV band inEMSS 1994) to the 0.1−2.4 keV en-
ergy band using the MEKAL plasma code (Mewe et al.
1985; Liedahl et al. 1995). The temperature dependence of
this conversion is taken into account by either using mea-
sured temperatures when available in the input catalogue,
or by iteration about the the non-core-excised luminosity-
temperature relation of Pratt et al. (2009), assuming an abun-
dance of 0.3. In the following all the quoted luminosities are
therefore as measured in the 0.1−2.4 keV energy band for
our reference cosmology.
2. The resulting luminosities are then converted toL 500 adopt-
ing two diﬀerent procedures, depending on the type of lumi-
nosity measurement available in the input catalogue.
–If only the total luminosityL tot (i.e., extrapolated up to
large distances) is available we adoptL 500 =a×L tot,
whereais the ratioL 500/Ltot for a luminosity proﬁle
model based in the average gas density proﬁle derived
6

## Page 7

R. Piﬀaretti et al.: The MCXC
Fig. 2.Relation between input quantitiesR ap andL ap =L(<R ap) and the iteratively estimatedR 500 andL 500 =L(<R 500) for the
NORAS/REFLEX clusters. The luminosity ratio as a function of aperture radius ratio is shown in the left panel, while the luminosity
ratio histogram is shown in the right panel.
from the representative X-ray cluster sample REXCESS
(Croston et al. 2008). More precisely, from the individual
scaled density proﬁles (see Arnaud et al. 2010, left panel
of Figure 3), we computed the average proﬁle andﬁtted
it with the AB-model given by Eqn. 2 in Pratt & Arnaud
(2002):
ρgas ∝
 x
xc
−α
×
1+
 x
xc
2
−3β/2+α/2
,(1)
forx=r/R 500,ﬁndingx c =0.303,α=0.525, andβ=
0.768.
Since only recently observational progress has shown
that the AB-model (Eq. 1) yields a more accurate de-
scription than the traditionalβ-model (see Croston et al.
2008, and references therein), most of the analyses listed
in Sect. 2 adopted the latter when extrapolating luminosi-
ties to large radii. For the sake of clarity, in Appendix A
we illustrate the diﬀerences between luminosities com-
puted adopting the AB-model or theβ-model.
Since observed luminosities are derived from surface
brightness proﬁles and integration within circular aper-
tures, the resulting luminosity proﬁle is cylindrically in-
tegrated up to aperture radii of 1 and 5×R 500 to com-
puteL 500 andL tot, respectively. The cluster boundary
is also assumed to be equal to 5×R 500. Weﬁnd a ra-
tioa=L 500/Ltot =0.91 and that the exact choice of
the aperture enclosing the total luminosity is not rele-
vant. This constant∼10% correction is therefore ap-
plied to all the 160SD, 400SD, SGP , W ARPS, CIZA,
MACS DIST, and EMSS clusters for which only total lu-
minosities are available (see Sect. 2). For theMACS MJFV
andMACS BRIGHTclusters no conversion is needed since
the quoted luminosities areL 500.
–For the remaining clusters, i.e. those with available aper-
ture luminositiesL ap (1333 objects in total ), we com-
puteL 500 iteratively. The basic ingredients of this itera-
tive procedure are the luminosity proﬁle model implied
by Eq. 1 and the luminosity-mass relation (L-M relation,
hereafter):
h(z)−7/3
 L500
1044 erg s−1

=C
 M500
3×10 14 M⊙
α
,(2)
with log(C)=0.274 andα=1.64 (see Table 1
in Arnaud et al. 2010). These values are slightly dif-
ferent from those given in Pratt et al. (2009) due to
Arnaud et al.’s use of an updatedM 500 −Y X relation.
Speciﬁcally, we use the relation in Eq. 2 of Arnaud et al.
(2010), i.e. we adopt a non-self-similar slope for the
M500 −Y X relation. The adoptedCandαvalues are de-
rived from REXCESS luminosity data uncorrected for
the Malmquist bias. The eﬀect of these choices is further
discussed below.
In addition to Eqs. 1 and 2, our iterative procedure neces-
sitates the basic input quantitiesR ap andL ap =L(<R ap),
the circular aperture radius and the aperture luminosity,
respectively. These are either directly available from the
input catalogues or can be computed as explained in Sect.
2 for the NORAS/REFLEX, BCS, SHARC, and NEP
catalogues.
For each cluster, the aperture luminosity and radius to-
gether with the model luminosity proﬁle set the luminos-
ity proﬁle in physical units (i.e. radius in Mpc). The latter
are then iteratively converted in units ofR 500 using Eq. 2
by usingL ap as the starting luminosity in the iteration. In
Fig. 2 we illustrate the relation between the input lumi-
nosityL ap andL 500 for the NORAS/REFLEX clusters.
As expected, small/large apertures yieldﬁnal luminosi-
tiesL 500 which are larger/smaller that the input aperture
7

## Page 8

R. Piﬀaretti et al.: The MCXC
luminosities (left panel). Notice that while on average the
diﬀerence betweenL ap andL 500 is∼5%, it is very rele-
vant for a signiﬁcant portion of the sample (right panel).
In order to explore the eﬀect of our choice ofM 500 −Y X
relation, we iteratively estimateL 500 by adopting the
Malmquist bias uncorrected L-M relation derived from
theM 500 −YX relation withself-similar slopegiven in Eq.
3 of Arnaud et al. (2010). Weﬁnd that for∼96,91% of
the clusters the diﬀerence is less that 5,2%, respectively.
The largest diﬀerences are found for low luminosity ob-
jects. In fact, if we consider clusters withL 500 ≥10 43
erg/s) weﬁnd that for∼99,95% of the clusters the dif-
ference is less that 5,2%, respectively.
In order to explore the reliability of our assumption con-
cerning the Malmquist bias correction of the L-M rela-
tion, we repeated our iterative procedure by using the
Malmquist bias corrected relationof Pratt et al. (2009),
ﬁnding essentially the sameL 500 (relative diﬀerences are
∼1%). This is expected, because the steep drop of the
typical cluster luminosity proﬁle with radius makesL 500
rather insensitive to the exact choice ofR 500.
Using the two above-described methods we can therefore
systematically computeL 500, the 0.1−2.4 keV energy band lu-
minosities withinR 500, for all the clusters (Table 3,L 500).
3.5. T otal masses
Total massesM 500, estimated for the same cosmology
adopted here, are directly available only forMACS MJFVand
MACS BRIGHTclusters 7. For almost all the clusters we therefore
rely on luminosity as a mass proxy and estimateM 500 (M 500
in Table 3) using Eq. 2. While our computation ofL 500 does
not depend on the details of the adopted L-M relation (non-self-
similarity of the underlyingM 500 −Y X relation and Malmquist
bias correction), obviously the estimatedM 500 does. In particu-
lar, theM 500 values provided by the MCXC rely on the assump-
tion that on average the Malmquist bias for the samples used
to construct the MCXC is the same as that of the REXCESS
sample. Since the selection functions of the samples we use are
complex (and indeed, in most cases are not known or available),
our mass estimates must rely on this assumption. In addition,
while our choice ensures maximal self-consistency in our mod-
eling, other calibrations of the L-M relation could be adopted.
Nevertheless, given our estimatedL 500, the computation of total
masses from a diﬀerent L-M relation is straightforward.
FromM 500 we estimate the characteristic radiiR 500 (R 500
in Table 3) using:
M500 =(4π/3)ρ c(z) 500R 3
500 , (3)
where the critical density isρ c(z)=3H(z) 2/8πG.
3.6. Notes
We gather together useful information concerning individual ob-
jects and add it to the MCXC as notes (NOTESin Table 3). In the
input catalogues this information is usually provided as notes
and comments and because it is diﬀerent in type and size from
catalogue to catalogue its homogenisation is not straightforward.
7 There are two exceptions (MACSJ0358.8-2955 and
MACSJ2311.5+0338), but these clusters do not end up in the
MCXC because they are also members of other catalogues.
In general, we choose not to include detailed and extended infor-
mation and we therefore refer the reader to the cited papers for
more information, e.g., the notes to Table 1 in Gioia & Luppino
(1994) or in Table 2 of Romer et al. (2000a). In the following we
describe the type of information we included inNOTES. For the
meaning of abbreviations we refer the reader to the cited papers
of each sub-catalogue.
For BCS, SGP , SHARC, NEP , MACS, CIZA, and EMSS
no information is provided or is too detailed to be added in
concisely. For NORAS we take information from column ID
in Table 1 of B¨ ohringer et al. (2000a) (information on source
identiﬁcation). For REFLEX, (B¨ ohringer et al. 2004a), where
the provided information is fairly detailed, we merge the fol-
lowing: (i) information in column Cm of Table 1 (information
on source identiﬁcation), (ii) the information concerning group-
ings as given in Table 10 with the simple note GR1, GR2, . . . ,
GR10 if the cluster is listed in one of the 10 groupings listed
in the table, (iii) multipeak information as given in Table 11
(columns Morphology and Orientation are merged, as e.g., two
maxima/NE-SW), and (iv) information on whether the cluster is
part of a line of sight structure as given in Table 12 (we simply
add losStr if the cluster appears in the table). For 400SD clusters
we take the information given in the column Notes in Table 4
of Burenin et al. (2007, information on alternative names is not
used). For 160SD clusters we take the information given in the
column Notes in Table 4 of Mullis et al. (2003, information on
alternative names is not used).
3.7. Scale
In order to facilitate the conversion between angular and phys-
ical sizes (e.g., forR 500) we provide the angular scale factor
SCALEin kpc/arcsec (see Table 3).
4. Duplicate clusters
The overlap between the survey areas of the input catalogues in-
duces duplicate (and in some cases triplicate, quadruplicate, etc.)
entries in the MCXC catalogue. In this Section we explain how
these are identiﬁed and which entry is retained in the MCXC. In
short, we search where a given cluster is a member of each in-
put catalogue and, according to criteria based on the type of data
and the size of the input catalogue, we retain only one entry in
the MCXC. The full list of clusters without removal of multiple
entries can be requested from the authors.
The most important criterion that we use to decide which du-
plicate cluster is preserved in the MCXC is the size of the input
catalogue. In addition we give higher priority to catalogues that
provide aperture luminosities because they ensure the most reli-
able and self-consistent computation ofL 500. These two criteria
allow us to rank the input catalogues from highest to lowest pri-
ority as in Table 1. Obviously, because of its size and the type
of information it provides, NORAS/REFLEX is the catalogue
with the highest priority. It is followed by other large and well-
deﬁned catalogues such as the 400SD, 160SD, BCS, etc. Hence,
when a cluster is listed in more than one catalogue it is retained
only as an entry in the input catalogue with higher priority. This
catalogue ranking is not crucial for CIZA because the overlap of
its survey area with other surveys is minimal.
Our procedure therefore reduces to the identiﬁcation of mul-
tiple entries. This identiﬁcation is based mainly on centroid coor-
dinate diﬀerences, and to a lesser extent on redshift diﬀerences.
Given the large number of entries, cluster identiﬁcation is per-
8

## Page 9

R. Piﬀaretti et al.: The MCXC
formed in three steps in order to progressively reduce the number
of candidate multiple entries.
1. In aﬁrst step if two clusters in diﬀerent catalogues have cen-
troid oﬀsets of less than 1’ and their relative redshift dif-
ference is less than 10 per cent they are identiﬁed as being
the same cluster. Although this step removes a large number
of duplicate entries, we compare their names and alternative
names to make sure that we do not remove single entries.
In the case of a doubtful association we do not remove any
entry.
2. In a second step the resulting catalogue is inspected once
more by carefully identifying clusters with centroid oﬀsets
of less than 5, 10, or even 20’, and by varying the relative
redshift diﬀerence. This time consuming procedure is needed
because diﬀerent source analysis techniques can yield rather
diﬀerent centroid positions, in particular for nearby clusters.
Redshift diﬀerences can be very large and we use them only
as indicators and not as stringent constraints. Each multi-
ple entry candidate is checked, with names and alternative
names used to facilitate the procedure. Again in this step we
are rather conservative and do not remove any cluster if the
identiﬁcation is not certain.
3. In a third step the cleaned catalogue is inspected once more
with large allowances for centroid oﬀsets, and any overlaps
are checked by visually inspecting RASS and PSPC maps.
The associations inspected in this last step are either multiple
systems or entries where very diﬀerent redshifts are given for
the same X-ray cluster.
In each of the three steps we make some exceptions to
the general rules explained above. When the redshift diﬀer-
ence is very large we keep the cluster with more recent or re-
liable redshift measurement. An extreme example is MCXC
J1524.6+0957 (VMF98 170 or BVH2007 198), whose redshift
is 0.07800 in SHARC and 0.5160 in 400SD. In this case, the
average temperature of 5.1 keV measured by Vikhlinin et al.
(2002) rules out the low redshift estimate. For double or multiple
systems we retain measurements for each of the components in-
stead of measurements of the whole system. This explains why,
although it has the highest priority, the NORAS/REFLEX cata-
logueﬁnally contains 10 clusters less than before our handling
of duplicates. If possible, we compared our duplicates identiﬁca-
tions with those in other work (e.g., Mullis et al. 2003) andﬁnd
perfect agreement.
In order to retain useful information, when an entry with no
available alternative name is kept in the MCXC catalogue while
the one we discard provides it, we copy this information into the
retained entry.
The MCXC provides information concerning multiple en-
tries in the input catalogues though the labelCAT OV(see Table
3) which contains the name of the sub-catalogue from which the
removed cluster entry is a member.
5. Discussion
5.1. Global catalogue characteristics
Theﬁnal MCXC is constructed from the input catalogues dis-
cussed in Sect. 2 with information homogenised as explained in
Sect. 3. Multiple entries in the resulting catalogue are handled as
described in Sect. 4. This procedure yields theﬁnal MCXC cat-
alogue, which comprises in total 1743 clusters (2397 initially,
see Table 1) and contains virtually no multiple entries. In the
following we illustrate some basic properties of the MCXC.
Notice that, because of the priorities we assign to the input cata-
logues, NORAS/REFLEX clusters constitute a large fraction of
the MCXC (see Table 1).
The MCXC redshift histogram is illustrated in the bottom
right hand panel of Fig. 1: 282, 77, and 18 clusters (∼16,4,1
per cent, respectively) have redshifts larger than 0.3, 0.5 and 0.7.
In Fig 3 we show the number of clusters as a function of luminos-
ity: 846, 64 (∼49,4 per cent, respectively) of the clusters have
0.1−2.4 keV band luminositiesL 500 larger than 1,10×10 44 erg/s.
In Fig. 4 we show the 0.1−2.4 keV band luminositiesL 500 of
Fig. 3.Luminosity distribution of MCXC clusters.
the 1743 MCXC clusters as a function of redshift in log-log (top
panel) and the more conventional lin-log scale (bottom panel).
Theseﬁgures highlight both the diﬀerent nature of RASS-based
and serendipitous surveys and their complementarity. For a given
redshift, serendipitously discovered clusters are less luminous
than those from RASS-based catalogues because the deeper ex-
posures allow lowerﬂux limits to be adopted. This implies that
the fraction of high redshift clusters in serendipitous surveys is
much higher than that of RASS-based surveys.
In addition to redshift and luminosity (and total mass), a fun-
damental quantity provided by the MCXC is the cluster posi-
tion in the sky, both in equatorial and galactic coordinates. In
Fig. 5 we show the distribution on the sky of the 1743 MCXC
clusters in galactic coordinates. Some distinctive features are:
NORAS/REFLEX, BCS and MACS clusters are fairly homo-
geneously distributed; the only clusters at low galactic latitude
are from the CIZA survey; the RASS-based clusters of SGP and
NEP are localised in narrow regions; serendipitous clusters are
sparsely distributed across the sky.
5.2. Robustness of luminosity measurements
As the luminosityL 500 the most relevant physical quantity pro-
vided by the MCXC, we focus on its discussion in the remainder
of this Section.
9

## Page 10

R. Piﬀaretti et al.: The MCXC
Fig. 4.T op: The 0.1−2.4 keV band luminositiesL 500 of the 1743 MCXC clusters as a function of redshift. Diamonds and triangles
indicate clusters from RASS-based and serendipitous catalogues, respectively.Bottom: Same, but in lin-log scale.
10

## Page 11

R. Piﬀaretti et al.: The MCXC
Fig. 5.Sky map of the 1743 MCXC clusters in galactic coordinates. Symbols and colors are the same as in Fig. 4.
Since the modeling adopted in Sect. 3 is based on results
from the REXCESS sample, and that the latter is a subsample
of REFLEX, the comparison of theL 500 values derived in this
work and those given in Pratt et al. (2009) for the 31 REXCESS
clusters provides a useful test for our procedure. We remind the
reader that for all the REFLEX clusters we computed the lumi-
nositiesL 500 from aperture luminosities by means of the iterative
procedure explained in Sect. 3. Weﬁnd that our derivedR 500 is
larger thanR ap for only seven REXCESS clusters, and at most
only by∼20 per cent. In Fig. 6 we show the ratio between our
estimate ofL 500 and theXMM-Newtonmeasurements given in
Pratt et al. (2009),L 500,REXCESS . Uncertainties on the luminos-
ity ratios are computed from quadratic sum of the errors given
in Pratt et al. (2009) and propagation of the aperture luminosity
errors provided in B¨ ohringer et al. (2004a). Notice that for one
cluster the redshift adopted in our work diﬀers from the one used
inL 500,REXCESS . Although we correct for this diﬀerence, this has
no impact on our results. Symbols in Fig. 6 are as in Pratt et al.
(2009), i.e. blue stars for cool core clusters and red squares for
morphologically disturbed clusters. We compute error weighted
means and standard deviations of the luminosity ratio andﬁnd:
0.965±0.141 for all 31 clusters, 0.932±0.078 for the cool core
clusters, and 0.951±0.193 for the disturbed clusters. Our com-
parison indicates a good agreement between the two measure-
ments. Notice the fairly large scatter at low luminosity, the large
scatter for disturbed clusters with respect to cool core clusters,
and that there is an indication that our luminosity estimates are
on average biased low in cool core systems (a 1σeﬀect). The
lower luminosity ratio for cool core clusters is expected because
they are modeled using the AB-model derived from the mean of
the REXCESS sample (Eq. 1), although their emission is more
centrally peaked. Weﬁnd no trend of luminosity ratio with the
ratioR ap/R500 and no redshift dependence as the REXCESS sam-
ple redshift leverage is too small.
5.3. Intercomparison of original luminosity measurements
The procedure adopted to handle multiple entries (detailed in
Sect. 4 ) allows us to compareL 500 estimates derived from dif-
ferent input luminosity measurements. A total of 558 MCXC en-
tries list the properties of a cluster that is a member of more that
one input catalogue, and for which only the information from
only one input catalogue has been retained. For these entries
there are therefore N luminosity measurements (one provided
by the MCXC and N-1 unused overlaps) of the 0.1−2.4 keV
band luminosityL 500. There are 5 clusters withN=5, 8 with
N=4, 59 withN=3, and 486 withN=2.
The luminositiesL 500 are compared as follows. For each
of the 558 entries we compute the ratioL 500/L500,MCXC where
L500,MCXC is the luminosity given in the MCXC andL 500 is the
luminosity of the same cluster, but derived from a diﬀerent in-
put catalogue (i.e., the overlap luminosity). As explained in Sect.
4, in some cases the redshifts provided by the input catalogues
can be fairly diﬀerent. We therefore correct the luminosities of
the overlaps by multiplying them with the squared ratio of the
luminosity distances at the two diﬀerent redshifts. This is equiv-
alent to comparing the 0.1−2.4 keV bandﬂuxes withinR 500.
The MCXC provides these luminosity ratios though the quantity
L 500 RAT(see Table 3) where they are ordered in the same way
as the sub-catalugue names inCAT OV.
11

## Page 12

R. Piﬀaretti et al.: The MCXC
Fig. 6.RatioL 500/L500,REXCESS between our estimate of the
0.1−2.4 keV band luminositiesL 500 and theXMM-Newtonmea-
surements of Pratt et al. (2009) as a function ofL 500. Blue stars
indicate cool core clusters while red squares morphologically
disturbed clusters. Solid lines indicate error weighted means
and dashed lines represent the error weighted means±error
weighted standard deviations (black for all clusters, blue for cool
core clusters, and red for morphologically disturbed clusters as
deﬁned in Pratt et al. (2009)).
In Fig. 7 we show the luminosityL 500 of the overlaps (top
panel) and the ratioL 500/L500,MCXC (bottom panel, in dex units)
as a function ofL 500,MCXC. Both a directﬁt to the data (which
is shown in the top panel of theﬁgure and basically indistin-
guishable from equality) and the mean value of the luminosity
ratios indicate that the diﬀerent luminosity determinations are in
excellent agreement. In particular, in order to avoid any bias in-
troduced by the wide range of luminosity values, we compute the
ratios of the log values of the luminosities. The error weighted
mean and standard deviation of these ratios are adopted to quan-
tify the agreement between the diﬀerent luminosity estimates.
Errors are computed from the uncertainties quoted in the input
catalogues, assuming that the relative error on the luminosities
L500 is the same as the one on the input luminosities. Weﬁnd
0.999 and 0.003 for the error weighted mean and standard de-
viation, respectively. We performed the same analysis by tak-
ing into account whether the compared luminosities are derived
from RASS or pointed observations and whether they are com-
puted iteratively or just by adopting a constant conversion factor
(see Sect. 3) andﬁnd no signiﬁant trend. The luminosity com-
parison therefore shows that on average the agreement between
diﬀerentL 500 measurements is excellent. However, the clear out-
liers in Fig. 7 indicate that for some clusters there are large dis-
crepancies.
Although a discussion on individual objects, and thus on the
diﬀerence between speciﬁc survey measurements, is beyond the
scope of our work, we brieﬂy discuss very discrepant luminosity
estimates by focussing on strong outliers with luminosity ratios
larger than 2 or smaller 0.5 in Fig. 7 (i.e., diﬀerences larger than
Fig. 7.LuminosityL 500 of the overlaps (top panel) and the ratio
L500/L500,MCXC in dex (bottom panel) as a function ofL 500,MCXC ,
the luminosity measurements retained in the MCXC. Symbols
and colors are the same as in Fig. 4, but refer to the overlaps only.
The solid line in the top panel indicates the bestﬁt to the data.
The solid line in the bottom panel indicates the error weighted
mean of the luminosity ratio, while the dashed horizontal lines
indicates the luminosity ratios equal to 2 and 0.5.
a factor of 2). There is a total of twenty objects (∼4 per cent
of those with more than one luminosity measurement) of such
discrepant estimates. For six of these clusters, three luminosity
estimates are available. Interestingly, of these, we alwaysﬁnd
that only one of the three is very diﬀerent from the others, and
that the two remaining estimates agree within a few percent. For
the other fourteen clusters only two estimates ofL 500 are avail-
able. Of these,ﬁve involve measurements from the EMSS and
seven are faint objects at low redshift, where extrapolation might
strongly aﬀect the luminosity estimates. For the remaining two
clusters (A2507 and RXC J1003.0+3254) weﬁnd no obvious
explanation.
6. Summary and conclusions
Motivated by the strong need for a large, homogeneous compila-
tion in the framework of X-ray, SZ and other multi-wavelength
studies, we have presented the construction and properties of
the MCXC, a Meta-Catalogue of X-ray detected Clusters of
12

## Page 13

R. Piﬀaretti et al.: The MCXC
galaxies. The MCXC is constructed from publicly-available
RASS-based (NORAS, REFLEX, BCS, SGP , NEP , MACS, and
CIZA) and serendipitous (160SD, 400SD, SHARC, W ARPS,
and EMSS) cluster catalogues (see Sect. 2). The information
from these input catalogues is systematically homogenised using
the most up to date knowledge of the structural properties and
scaling relations of X-ray clusters, and is undertaken in a self-
consistent way (see Sect. 3). More speciﬁcally, in addition to the
fairly straightforward standardisation of quantities such as coor-
dinates and redshifts (RAJ2000,DEJ2000, etc., andZin Tables 2
and 3), we converted the available luminosities to 0.1−2.4 keV
band luminositiesL 500 (L 500in Table 3) by adopting the aver-
age gas density proﬁle (Croston et al. 2008) and L-M relation
(Pratt et al. 2009) derived from the representative X-ray clus-
ter sample REXCESS. The computation is performed directly
from aperture luminosities when available (∼76 per cent of the
MCXC clusters) and we verify that the derived luminosities do
not depend on the details of the adopted L-M relation.
Total massesM 500 and radiiR 500 can be computed from the
luminositiesL 500 by adopting an L-M relation. The MCXC pro-
vides these quantities computed self-consistently using the L-
M relation adopted in this work (M 500andR 500in Table 3).
The MCXC further provides three cluster identiﬁers: the MCXC
name, the original name as given in the input catalogues, and
an alternative name (NAME MCXC,NAME, andNAME ALTin Table
2, respectively). The latter has been homogenised to match both
SIMBAD and NED standards. In addition, we collated impor-
tant information usually provided as notes and comments in the
input catalogues (NOTESin Table 3).
Multiple entries originating from overlaps between the sur-
vey areas of the input catalogues are very carefully handled (see
Sect. 4). The result of this procedure is provided by the MCXC
(CAT OVin Table 3). We compare luminosity measurements
from diﬀerent catalogues,ﬁnding that on average the agree-
ment is excellent, and discuss the most discrepant measurements
(see Sect. 5). Weﬁnd good agreement with the precisely mea-
sured REXCESS luminosities given in Pratt et al. (2009). These
comparisons strongly support the validity of our approach. The
MCXC provides the luminosity ratios for clusters that appear in
multiple input catalogues (seeL 500 RATin Table 3).
The MCXC comprises 1743 clusters ordered by right as-
cension, and contains virtually no multiple entries. The full
MCXC is available at CDS 8 and contains the information given
in Columns (1)-(19) in Tables 2 and 3, where theﬁrst 40 entries
are given as an example.
We envisage that the catalogue will be useful for the con-
struction of representative samples for work on structural proper-
ties and samples for cosmological investigations; examination of
SZ-X-ray scaling relations; checking of SZ candidates; selection
function studies; deﬁnition of samples for lensing and optical/IR
follow-up. The work by Melin et al. (2010) is an example of how
the information provided by the MCXC can be used for SZ stud-
ies. In particular, their work illustrates that given the MCXC lu-
minosities, the universal pressure proﬁle and the associated SZ
scaling relations provided by Arnaud et al. (2010) yield the X-
ray predicted SZ signal from individual objects, which can be
then compared to those observed with WMAP . This approach
will be extremely useful for studies based on SZ surveys such as
Planck, SPT, and ACT.
The MCXC is an ongoing project and will be extended to
include available data for individual clusters at high redshift (the
most relevant for cosmological studies) and cluster catalogues
8 http://cds.u-strasbg.fr/
derived from ongoing X-ray surveys when they are publicly
available.
Acknowledgements.We thank Isabella Gioia, Patrick Henry, and Donald Horner
for helpful discussions and Nabila Aghanim for strongly supporting the project.
This research has made use of the VizieR database, operated at CDS, Strasbourg.
EP acknowledges the support of grant ANR-06-JCJC-0141.
References
Andersson, K., Benson, B. A., Ade, P . A. R., et al. 2010, ApJ, submitted
(arXiv:1006.3068)
Arnaud, M., Pointecouteau, E., & Pratt, G. W. 2007, A&A, 474, L37
Arnaud, M., Pratt, G. W., Piﬀaretti, R., et al. 2009, A&A, in press (arXiv:
0910.1234)
Barkhouse, W. A., Green, P . J., Vikhlinin, A., et al. 2006, ApJ, 645, 955
B¨ ohringer, H., Briel, U. G., Schwarz, R. A., et al. 1994, Nature, 368, 828
B¨ ohringer, H., V oges, W., Huchra, J. P ., et al. 2000, ApJS, 129, 435
B¨ ohringer, H., V oges, W., Huchra, J. P ., et al. 2000, VizieR Online Data Catalog,
212, 90435
B¨ ohringer, H., Schuecker, P ., Guzzo, L., et al. 2004, A&A, 425, 367
B¨ ohringer, H., Schuecker, P ., Guzzo, L., et al. 2004, VizieR Online Data Catalog,
342, 50367
B¨ ohringer, H., Schuecker, P ., Pratt, G. W., et al. 2007, A&A, 469, 363
Burenin, R. A., Vikhlinin, A., Hornstrup, A., et al. 2007, ApJS, 172, 561
Burenin, R. A., Vikhlinin, A., Hornstrup, A., et al. 2009, VizieR Online Data
Catalog, 217, 20561
Burke, D. J., Collins, C. A., Sharples, R. M., Romer, A. K., & Nichol, R. C.
2003, MNRAS, 341, 1093
Burke, D. J., Collins, C. A., Sharples, R. M., Romer, A. K., & Nichol, R. C.
2003, VizieR Online Data Catalog, 734, 11093
Carlstrom, J. E., Ade, P . A. R., Aird, K. A., et al. 2009, PASP , submitted (arXiv:
0907.4445)
Croston, J. H., Pratt, G. W., B¨ ohringer, H., et al. 2008, A&A, 487, 431
Cruddace, R., V oges, W., B¨ ohringer, H., et al. 2002, ApJS, 140, 239
Cruddace, R., V oges, W., B¨ ohringer, H., et al. 2002, VizieR Online Data Catalog,
214, 239
Cruddace, R., V oges, W., B¨ ohringer, H., et al. 2003, ApJS, 144, 299
Ebeling, H., Edge, A. C., Bohringer, H., et al. 1998, MNRAS, 301, 881
Ebeling, H., Edge, A. C., Allen, S. W., et al. 2000, MNRAS, 318, 333
Ebeling, H., Edge, A. C., Boehringer, H., et al. 2000, VizieR Online Data
Catalog, 730, 10881
Ebeling, H., Edge, A. C., Allen, S. W., et al. 2000, VizieR Online Data Catalog,
731, 80333
Ebeling, H., Edge, A. C., & Henry, J. P . 2001, ApJ, 553, 668
Ebeling, H., Mullis, C. R., & Tully, R. B. 2002, ApJ, 580, 774
Ebeling, H., Barrett, E., Donovan, D., et al. 2007, ApJ, 661, L33
Ebeling, H., Edge, A. C., Mantz, A., et al. 2010, MNRAS, in press
(arXiv:1004.4683)
Evrard, A. E., Metzler, C. A., & Navarro, J. F. 1996, ApJ, 469, 494
Fassbender, R., 2008, PhD thesis (astro-ph/0806.0861v1)
Fowler, J. W., Niemack, M. D., Dicker, S. R., et al. 2007, Appl. Opt., 46, 3444
Gioia, I. M., Maccacaro, T., Schild, R. E., et al. 1990, ApJS, 72, 567
Gioia, I. M., & Luppino, G. A. 1994, ApJS, 94, 583
Henry, J. P . 2000, ApJ, 534, 565
Henry, J. P . 2004, ApJ, 609, 603
Henry, J. P ., Mullis, C. R., V oges, W., et al. 2006, ApJS, 162, 304
Horner, D. J., Perlman, E. S., Ebeling, H., et al. 2008, ApJS, 176, 374
Horner, D. J., Perlman, E. S., Ebeling, H., et al. 2009, VizieR Online Data
Catalog, 217, 60374
Kocevski, D. D., Ebeling, H., Mullis, C. R., & Tully, R. B. 2007, ApJ, 662, 224
Komatsu, E., Smith, K. M., Dunkley, J., et al. 2010, ApJSS, submitted
(arXiv:1001.4538)
Kravtsov, A. V ., Vikhlinin, A., & Nagai, D. 2006, ApJ, 650, 128
Liedahl, D. A., Osterheld, A. L., & Goldstein, W. H. 1995, ApJ, 438, L115
Mahdavi, A., Hoekstra, H., Babul, A., & Henry, J. P . 2008, MNRAS, 384, 1567
Majumdar, S., & Mohr, J. J. 2003, ApJ, 585, 603
Mantz, A., Allen, S. W., Rapetti, D., & Ebeling, H. 2009, MNRAS, submitted
(arXiv: 0909.3098)
Mantz, A., Allen, S. W., Ebeling, H., Rapetti, D., & Drlica-Wagner, A. 2009,
MNRAS, submitted (arXiv:0909.3099)
Markevitch, M. , & Vikhlinin, A. 2007, Phys. Rep., 443, 1
Maughan, B. J. 2007, ApJ, 668, 772
Maughan, B. J., Jones, C., Forman, W., & V an Speybroeck, L. 2008, ApJS, 174,
117
McNamara, B. R., & Nulsen, P . E. J. 2007, ARA&A, 45, 117
Melin, J.-B., Bartlett, J. G., & Delabrouille, J. 2006, A&A, 459, 341
13

## Page 14

R. Piﬀaretti et al.: The MCXC
Melin, J.-B., Bartlett, J. G., Delabrouille, J., et al. 2010, A&A, submitted
(arXiv: 1001.0871)
Menanteau, F., Gonzalez, J., Juin, J.-B., et al. 2010, ApJ, submitted (arXiv:
1006.5126)
Meneghetti, M., Rasia, E., Merten, J., et al. 2010, A&A, 514, A93
Mewe, R., Gronenschild, E. H. B. M., & van den Oord, G. H. J. 1985, A&AS,
62, 197
Mullis, C. R., McNamara, B. R., Quintana, H., et al. 2003, ApJ, 594, 154
Nagai, D., Vikhlinin, A., & Kravtsov, A. V . 2007, ApJ, 655, 98
Pacaud, F., Pierre, M., Refregier, A., et al. 2007, MNRAS, 382, 1289
Perlman, E. S., Horner, D. J., Jones, L. R., et al. 2002, ApJS, 140, 265
Perlman, E. S., Horner, D. J., Jones, L. R., et al. 2002, VizieR Online Data
Catalog, 214, 265
Piﬀaretti, R., & V aldarnini, R. 2008, A&A, 491, 71
Popesso, P ., B¨ ohringer, H., Brinkmann, J., V oges, W., & Y ork, D. G. 2004, A&A,
423, 449
Pratt, G. W., & Arnaud, M. 2002, A&A, 394, 375
Pratt, G. W., Croston, J. H., Arnaud, M., Bohringer, H. 2009, A&A, 498, 361
Pratt, G. W., Arnaud, M., Piﬀaretti, R.,et al. 2010, A&A, 511, A85
Rasia, E., Ettori, S., Moscardini, L., et al. 2006, MNRAS, 369, 2013
Romer, A. K., Nichol, R. C., Holden, B. P ., et al. 2000, ApJS, 126, 209
Romer, A. K., Nichol, R. C., Holden, B. P ., et al. 2000, VizieR Online Data
Catalog, 212, 60209
Romer, A. K., Viana, P . T. P ., Liddle, A. R., & Mann, R. G. 2001, ApJ, 547, 594
Rosati, P ., della Ceca, R., Norman, C., & Giacconi, R. 1998, ApJ, 492, L21
Rosati, P ., Borgani, S., & Norman, C. 2002, ARA&A, 40, 539
ˇSuhada, R., Song, J., B ¨ ohringer, H., et al. 2010, A&A, 514, L3
Sunyaev, R. A., & Zel’dovich, Y . B. 1972, Comments on Astrophysics and Space
Physics, 4, 173
Tauber, J. A., Mandolesi, N., Puget, J.-L., et al. 2010, A&A, in press
V anderlinde, K., Crawford, T. M., de Haan, T., et al. 2010, ApJ, submitted
(arXiv: 1003.0003)
Vikhlinin, A., van Speybroeck, L., Markevitch, M., Forman, W. R., & Grego, L.
2002, ApJ, 578, L107
Vikhlinin, A., Kravtsov, A., Forman, W. R. 2006, ApJ, 640, 691
Vikhlinin, A., Burenin, R. A., Ebeling, H., et al. 2009, ApJ, 692, 1033
V oges, W., Aschenbach, B., Boller, T., et al. 1999, A&A, 349, 389
V oit, G. M. 2005, Reviews of Modern Physics, 77, 207
Zhang, Y .-Y ., Okabe, N., Finoguenov, A., et al. 2010, ApJ, 711, 1033
14

## Page 15

R. Piﬀaretti et al.: The MCXC
T able 2.Theﬁrst 40 entries of the MCXC catalogue. The full MCXC is available at CDS.
NAMEMCXC NAMENAMEALT RAJ2000 DEJ2000RAJ2000DEJ2000 GLON GLAT ZCATALOGUE SUBCATALOGUE
MCXC name NameAlternative Right DeclinationRight Declination Galactic Galactic Redshift CatalogueSub-catalogue
name ascensionascension longitude latitudename name
(J2000) (J2000) (deg)(deg) (deg) (deg)
(1) (2)(3)(4) (5) (6)(7) (8) (9)(10) (11) (12)
MCXC J0000.1+0816 RXC J0000.1+0816 UGC 12890 00 00 07.1 08 1627.8 0.030 8.274 101.783-52.477 0.0396 NORAS/REFLEX NORAS
MCXC J0000.4-0237 RXC J0000.4-023700 00 24.7 -02 37 30.0 0.103-2.625 94.268 -62.622 0.0379 SGPSGP
MCXC J0001.6-1540 RXC J0001.6-154000 01 39.0 -15 40 52.0 0.413 -15.68175.129 -73.733 0.1246 SGPSGP
MCXC J0001.9+1204 RXC J0001.9+1204 A2692 00 01 57.012 04 22.8 0.488 12.073 104.308-49.001 0.2033 NORAS/REFLEX NORAS
MCXC J0003.1-0605 J0003.1-0605 A269700 03 11.8 -06 05 09.6 0.799-6.086 92.169 -66.033 0.2320 NORAS/REFLEX REFLEX
MCXC J0003.2-3555 J0003.2-3555 A271700 03 12.1 -35 55 37.6 0.801 -35.927349.330 -76.490 0.0490 NORAS/REFLEX REFLEX
MCXC J0003.8+0203 J0003.8+0203 A270000 03 50.6 02 03 48.2 0.9612.063 99.610 -58.637 0.0924 NORAS/REFLEX REFLEX
MCXC J0004.9+1142 RXC J0004.9+1142 UGC 00032 00 04 59.4 11 4202.2 1.247 11.701 105.239-49.569 0.0761 NORAS/REFLEX NORAS
MCXC J0005.3+1612 RXC J0005.3+1612 A2703 00 05 22.616 12 37.8 1.344 16.211 107.133-45.244 0.1164 NORAS/REFLEX NORAS
MCXC J0006.0-3443 J0006.0-3443 A272100 06 03.0 -34 43 26.8 1.513 -34.724352.147 -77.668 0.1147 NORAS/REFLEX REFLEX
MCXC J0006.3+1052 RXC J0006.3+1052 ZwCl15 00 06 21.710 52 03.7 1.591 10.868 105.386-50.462 0.1698 NORAS/REFLEX NORAS
MCXC J0008.9+4110 ZwCl28 ZwCl2800 08 56.9 41 10 37.2 2.23741.177 114.386 -20.989 0.1537 BCSeBCS
MCXC J0009.7-3516 MS0007.2-353200 09 46.5 -35 16 30.0 2.444 -35.275347.884 -77.942 0.0500 EMSSEMSS1994
MCXC J0011.3-2851 J0011.3-2851 A273400 11 20.7 -28 51 18.4 2.836 -28.85519.562 -80.986 0.0620 NORAS/REFLEX REFLEX
MCXC J0011.7-1523 MACSJ0011.7-152300 11 42.8 -15 23 22.0 2.928 -15.38982.746 -75.067 0.3780 MACSMACSBRIGHT
MCXC J0011.7+3225 RXC J0011.7+3225 A0007 00 11 44.432 25 01.2 2.935 32.417 113.289-29.710 0.1073 NORAS/REFLEX NORAS
MCXC J0013.6-1930 J0013.6-1930 A001300 13 38.3 -19 30 07.6 3.409 -19.50272.276 -78.456 0.0940 NORAS/REFLEX REFLEX
MCXC J0014.3-6604 J0014.3-6604 A274600 14 18.4 -66 04 39.0 3.577 -66.078308.850 -50.622 0.1599 NORAS/REFLEX REFLEX
MCXC J0014.3-3023 J0014.3-3023 A274400 14 18.8 -30 23 00.2 3.578 -30.3838.936 -81.240 0.3066 NORAS/REFLEX REFLEX
MCXC J0014.3+0854 MS0011.7+083700 14 19.8 08 54 00.0 3.5838.900 107.635 -52.866 0.1630 EMSSEMSS1994
MCXC J0015.4-2350 J0015.4-2350 A1400 15 24.0 -23 50 42.0 3.850 -23.84552.930 -81.233 0.0645 NORAS/REFLEX REFLEX
MCXC J0015.9+1614 MS0013.4+155800 15 55.9 16 14 57.5 3.98316.249 110.669 -45.775 0.0830 EMSSEMSS1994
MCXC J0016.3-3121 RXC J0016.3-3121 A275100 16 19.8 -31 21 55.1 4.083 -31.3651.882 -81.252 0.0805 SGPSGP
MCXC J0016.7+0646 RXC J0016.7+0646 A0016 00 16 45.506 46 25.0 4.190 6.774107.775 -55.074 0.0833 NORAS/REFLEX NORAS
MCXC J0017.5-3509 J0017.5-3509 A275500 17 33.7 -35 09 54.0 4.390 -35.165342.856 -79.187 0.0968 NORAS/REFLEX REFLEX
MCXC J0018.5+1626 MACSJ0018.5+1626 CL 0016+1609 00 18 33.8 16 26 16.64.641 16.438 111.609 -45.710 0.5456MACS MACSDIST
MCXC J0019.0-2026 RXC J0019.0-2026 S2600 19 03.9 -20 26 17.2 4.766 -20.43873.324 -80.025 0.2773 SGPSGP
MCXC J0019.6+2517 RXC J0019.6+251700 19 39.1 25 17 26.9 4.91325.291 113.924 -37.024 0.1353 NORAS/REFLEX NORAS
MCXC J0020.1+0005 RXC J0020.1+000500 20 10.7 00 05 30.1 5.0440.092 106.230 -61.762 0.2124 NORAS/REFLEX NORAS
MCXC J0020.5-4913 RXC J0020.5-4913 A276400 20 34.1 -49 13 40.1 5.142 -49.228315.963 -67.112 0.0711 SGPSGP
MCXC J0020.6+2840 RXC J0020.6+2840 A0021 00 20 40.928 40 30.4 5.171 28.675 114.819-33.712 0.0940 NORAS/REFLEX NORAS
MCXC J0020.7-2542 J0020.7-2542 A002200 20 42.8 -25 42 37.1 5.179 -25.71042.851 -82.978 0.1410 NORAS/REFLEX REFLEX
MCXC J0021.5+2803 RXC J0021.5+2803 IV Zw 015 00 21 35.928 03 04.7 5.400 28.051 114.954-34.358 0.0948 NORAS/REFLEX NORAS
MCXC J0022.0+0422 J0022.0+0422 GHO 00190.5+0405 00 22 03.4 04 22 37.9 5.5144.377 109.128 -57.705 0.4070 W ARPSW ARPS
MCXC J0023.1+0421 J0023.1+042100 23 06.0 04 21 13.0 5.7754.354 109.596 -57.783 0.4530 W ARPSW ARPS
MCXC J0024.0-1704 RXC J0024.0-1704 A276800 24 03.6 -17 04 32.2 6.015 -17.07689.329 -78.121 0.1890 SGPSGP
MCXC J0024.5+3312 RXC J0024.5+331200 24 31.8 33 12 31.3 6.13333.209 116.478 -29.326 0.2260 NORAS/REFLEX NORAS
MCXC J0025.4-1222 MACSJ0025.4-122200 25 29.4 -12 22 37.1 6.372 -12.37799.264 -74.044 0.5843 MACSMACSDIST
MCXC J0025.5-3302 J0025.5-3302 S004100 25 32.4 -33 02 49.9 6.385 -33.047344.774 -81.854 0.0491 NORAS/REFLEX REFLEX
MCXC J0026.7+0501 J0026.7+0501 GHO 0024+0444 00 26 47.8 05 01 25.7 6.6995.024 111.519 -57.301 0.2529 W ARPSW ARPSII
15

## Page 16

R. Piﬀaretti et al.: The MCXC
T able 3.Theﬁrst 40 entries of the MCXC catalogue, continued.
NAMEMCXC ZSCALE L500 M500 R500 NOTES CATOV L500rat
MCXC name Redshift ScaleL500M500R500Notes CataloguesL500/L500,MCXC
(kpc/”) (1044erg/s) (1014M⊙) (Mpc) overlap
(13) (14) (15)(16) (17) (18)(19)
MCXC J0000.1+0816 0.0396 0.784 0.1960.737 0.630BCS 1.084
MCXC J0000.4-0237 0.0379 0.752 0.0520.330 0.482
MCXC J0001.6-1540 0.1246 2.234 0.8151.656 0.802
MCXC J0001.9+1204 0.2033 3.342 1.9902.693 0.918
MCXC J0003.1-0605 0.2320 3.698 6.1075.219 1.133SGP 0.952
MCXC J0003.2-3555 0.0490 0.959 0.4421.202 0.739 losStr SGP0.886
MCXC J0003.8+0203 0.0924 1.719 0.8471.734 0.823eBCS|SGP 0.920|0.922
MCXC J0004.9+1142 0.0761 1.443 0.5191.301 0.752eBCS 0.967
MCXC J0005.3+1612 0.1164 2.107 1.5792.493 0.922 B EMSS1994 0.533
MCXC J0006.0-3443 0.1147 2.080 1.8092.712 0.949SGP 0.949
MCXC J0006.3+1052 0.1698 2.895 2.2732.994 0.962eBCS 0.933
MCXC J0008.9+4110 0.1537 2.668 2.1112.896 0.957
MCXC J0009.7-3516 0.0500 0.977 0.2620.873 0.664
MCXC J0011.3-2851 0.0620 1.195 1.0862.061 0.881 losStr SGP0.914
MCXC J0011.7-1523 0.3780 5.188 8.9007.200 1.190
MCXC J0011.7+3225 0.1073 1.962 2.5723.378 1.023BCS 1.042
MCXC J0013.6-1930 0.0940 1.746 1.2362.182 0.888 losStr SGP0.955
MCXC J0014.3-6604 0.1599 2.756 2.8273.446 1.012 X
MCXC J0014.3-3023 0.3066 4.522 11.8187.361 1.236SGP|MACSBRIGHT 0.985|1.139
MCXC J0014.3+0854 0.1630 2.800 1.9282.722 0.934
MCXC J0015.4-2350 0.0645 1.240 0.3260.988 0.689 X SGP0.956
MCXC J0015.9+1614 0.0830 1.561 0.3200.964 0.679
MCXC J0016.3-3121 0.0805 1.518 0.4951.261 0.743
MCXC J0016.7+0646 0.0833 1.566 0.3190.963 0.679eBCS 1.385
MCXC J0017.5-3509 0.0968 1.792 0.6921.529 0.788 losStr SGP0.964
MCXC J0018.5+1626 0.5456 6.386 17.911 7.7851.148 EMSS2004 0.593
MCXC J0019.0-2026 0.2773 4.215 5.5714.763 1.081
MCXC J0019.6+2517 0.1353 2.397 1.4422.327 0.895
MCXC J0020.1+0005 0.2124 3.458 0.6871.398 0.735
MCXC J0020.5-4913 0.0711 1.356 0.2680.873 0.659
MCXC J0020.6+2840 0.0940 1.746 1.4352.389 0.916BCS 1.201
MCXC J0020.7-2542 0.1410 2.482 2.8723.527 1.026SGP 0.912
MCXC J0021.5+2803 0.0948 1.759 0.9681.878 0.845BCS 0.956
MCXC J0022.0+0422 0.4070 5.430 0.5821.082 0.628
MCXC J0023.1+0421 0.4530 5.781 0.7851.250 0.647
MCXC J0024.0-1704 0.1890 3.156 1.4842.276 0.872
MCXC J0024.5+3312 0.2260 3.626 2.9933.394 0.983
MCXC J0025.4-1222 0.5843 6.603 8.0424.623 0.950
MCXC J0025.5-3302 0.0491 0.961 0.4951.287 0.756SGP 0.929
MCXC J0026.7+0501 0.2529 3.943 0.3260.860 0.616
16

## Page 17

R. Piﬀaretti et al.: The MCXC
Fig. A.1.Luminosity radial proﬁle normalised atR ap =0.5×R 500
for the AB-model (black line) andβ-models with diﬀerent core
radii (color lines).
Appendix A: AB-model versus β-model luminosity
proﬁles
In the following we illustrate the diﬀerence between predictions
based on the AB-model and a ’typical’β-model. In particular we
focus onL 500 and total luminositiesL tot estimated from a given
aperture luminosity.
The AB-model adopted in this work is given by Eq. 1 with
x=r/R 500,x c =0.303,α=0.525, andβ=0.768 (see Sect. 3)
and we investigateβ-models given by Eq. 1 withα=0,β=2/3,
andx c =0.05,0.1,0.2,0.3,and 0.4 (x c =r c/R500, wherer c is the
usualβ-model core radius).
For all models we compute luminosity proﬁles (spherically
symmetric) which are then cylindrically integrated to obtain
’projected’ luminosities as a function of cluster-centric distance.
Finally these are normalised atR ap whereL(<R ap)=L ap and
shown in Fig. A.1 forR ap =0.5×R 500. Theﬁgure shows that,
with respect to the AB-model,β-models with small core radii
yield centrally concentrated luminosity proﬁles, which in turn
are shallow at large radii. The opposite is true forβ-models with
large core radii, which predict very extended proﬁles. With re-
spect to the AB-model, aβ-model withx c =0.05 underestimates
L500 by∼20% while forx c =0.4 it yields a factor of 2 larger
value.
We investigate the eﬀect of modeling on global luminosi-
ties by computingL 500 andL tot =L(<5×R 500) as a function
ofR ap. In Fig. A.2 we show theβ-model to AB-model ratio of
L/Lap (the normalised luminosity proﬁle) evaluated atR 500 (i.e.
L=L 500, solid lines) and 5×R 500 (i.e.L=L tot, dashed lines)
as a function ofR ap. With respect to the AB-model,β-models
with small/large core radii underestimate/overestimateL 500 for
apertures smaller thatR 500, while forR ap >R 500 this behavior
is reversed. Total luminositiesL tot are always higher/lower than
the AB-model estimates forβ-models with small/large core radii
and the diﬀerence increases with decreasingR ap.
Fig. A.2.Theβ-model to AB-model ratio of the normalised lu-
minosity proﬁleL/L ap evaluated atR 500 (solid lines) and 5×R 500
(dashed lines) as a function ofR ap.
17
